#
# The right margin in this file is 65 characters.
# In Emacs use -- set-variable: fill-column = 65
#

=head1 NAME

Monit - utility for monitoring services on a Unix system


=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<monit> [options] {arguments}


=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<monit> is a utility for managing and monitoring processes,
files, directories and filesystems on a Unix system. Monit
conducts automatic maintenance and repair and can execute
meaningful causal actions in error situations. E.g. Monit can
start a process if it does not run, restart a process if it does
not respond and stop a process if it uses too much resources. You
may use Monit to monitor files, directories and filesystems for
changes, such as timestamps changes, checksum changes or size
changes.

Monit is controlled via an easy to configure control file based
on a free-format, token-oriented syntax. Monit logs to syslog or
to its own log file and notifies you about error conditions via
customizable alert messages. Monit can perform various TCP/IP
network checks, protocol checks and can utilize SSL for such
checks. Monit provides a http(s) interface and you may use a
browser to access the Monit program.


=head1 GENERAL OPERATION

The behavior of Monit is controlled by command-line options
I<and> a run control file, F<~/.monitrc>, the syntax of which we
describe in a later section. Command-line options override
F<.monitrc> declarations.

The following options are recognized by monit. However, it is
recommended that you set options (when applicable) directly in
the I<.monitrc> control file.

=head2 General Options and Arguments

B<-c> I<file>
   Use this control file

B<-d> I<n>
   Run as a daemon once per I<n> seconds

B<-g> 
   Set group name for start, stop, restart, monitor and
   unmonitor.

B<-l> I<logfile>
   Print log information to this file 

B<-p> I<pidfile>
   Use this lock file in daemon mode

B<-s> I<statefile>
   Write state information to this file

B<-I>
   Do not run in background (needed for run from init)

B<-t>
   Run syntax check for the control file

B<-v>
   Verbose mode, work noisy (diagnostic output)

B<-H> I<[filename]>
   Print MD5 and SHA1 hashes of the file or of stdin if the 
   filename is omitted; Monit will exit afterwards

B<-V>
   Print version number and patch level

B<-h>
   Print a help text


In addition to the options above, Monit can be started with one
of the following action arguments; Monit will then execute the
action and exit without transforming itself to a daemon.


B<start all>
   Start all services listed in the control file and 
   enable monitoring for them. If the group option is 
   set, only start and enable monitoring of services in
   the named group (no "all" verb is required in this
   case).

B<start name>
   Start the named service and enable monitoring for 
   it. The name is a service entry name from the 
   monitrc file.

B<stop all>     
   Stop all services listed in the control file and 
   disable their monitoring. If the group option is 
   set, only stop and disable monitoring of the services 
   in the named group (no "all" verb is required in this
   case).

B<stop name>
   Stop the named service and disable its monitoring. 
   The name is a service entry name from the monitrc 
   file. 

B<restart all>
   Stop and start I<all> services. If the group option 
   is set, only restart the services in the named group
   (no "all" verb is required in this case).

B<restart name>
   Restart the named service. The name is a service entry 
   name from the monitrc file.

B<monitor all>     
   Enable monitoring of all services listed in the
   control file. If the group option is set, only start
   monitoring of services in the named group (no "all"
   verb is required in this case).

B<monitor name>
   Enable monitoring of the named service.  The name is
   a service entry name from the monitrc file. Monit will
   also enable monitoring of all services this service 
   depends on.

B<unmonitor all>     
   Disable monitoring of all services listed in the
   control file. If the group option is set, only disable
   monitoring of services in the named group (no "all"
   verb is required in this case).

B<unmonitor name>
   Disable monitoring of the named service. The name is
   a service entry name from the monitrc file. Monit 
   will also disable monitoring of all services that 
   depends on this service.

B<status>
    Print full status information for each service.

B<summary>
    Print short status information for each service.

B<reload>
    Reinitialize a running Monit daemon, the daemon will
    reread its configuration, close and reopen log files.

B<quit>
    Kill a Monit daemon process

B<validate>
   Check all services listed in the control file. This 
   action is also the default behavior when Monit runs 
   in daemon mode.


=head1 WHAT TO MONITOR

You may use Monit to monitor daemon processes or similar programs
running on localhost. Monit is particular useful for monitoring
daemon processes, such as those started at system boot time from
/etc/init.d/. For instance sendmail, sshd, apache and mysql. In
difference to many monitoring systems, Monit can act if an error
situation should occur, e.g.; if sendmail is not running, monit
can start sendmail or if apache is using too much resources (e.g.
if a DoS attack is in progress) Monit can stop or restart apache
and send you an alert message. Monit can also monitor process
characteristics, such as; if a process has become a zombie and
how much memory or cpu cycles a process is using.

You may also use Monit to monitor files, directories and
filesystems on localhost. Monit can monitor these items for
changes, such as timestamps changes, checksum changes or size
changes. This is also useful for security reasons - you can
monitor the md5 checksum of files that should not change.

You may even use Monit to monitor remote hosts. First and
foremost Monit is a utility for monitoring and mending services
on localhost, but if a service depends on a remote service, e.g.
a database server or an application server, it might by useful to
be able to test a remote host as well.

You may monitor the general system-wide resources such as cpu
usage, memory and load average.


=head1 HOW TO MONITOR

Monit is configured and controlled via a control file called
B<monitrc>. The default location for this file is ~/.monitrc. If
this file does not exist, Monit will try /etc/monitrc, then
S<@sysconfdir@>/monitrc and finally ./monitrc.

A Monit control file consists of a series of service entries and
global option statements in a free-format, token-oriented syntax.
Comments begin with a # and extend through the end of the line.
There are three kinds of tokens in the control file: grammar
keywords, numbers and strings.

On a semantic level, the control file consists of three types of
statements:

=over 4

=item 1. Global set-statements 

A global set-statement starts with the keyword I<set> and the
item to configure.

=item 2. Global include-statement

The include statement consists of the keyword I<include> and
a glob string.

=item 3. One or more service entry statements.

A service entry starts with the keyword I<check> followed by the
service type. 

=back

A Monit control file example:

 #
 # Monit control file
 # 

 set daemon 120 # Poll at 2-minute intervals
 set logfile syslog facility log_daemon
 set alert foo@bar.baz
 set httpd port 2812 and use address localhost
     allow localhost   # Allow localhost to connect
     allow admin:Monit # Allow Basic Auth

 check system myhost.mydomain.tld
    if loadavg (1min) > 4 then alert
    if loadavg (5min) > 2 then alert
    if memory usage > 75% then alert
    if cpu usage (user) > 70% then alert
    if cpu usage (system) > 30% then alert
    if cpu usage (wait) > 20% then alert

 check process apache 
    with pidfile "/usr/local/apache/logs/httpd.pid"
    start program = "/etc/init.d/httpd start" with timeout 60 seconds
    stop program = "/etc/init.d/httpd stop"
    if 2 restarts within 3 cycles then timeout
    if totalmem > 100 Mb then alert
    if children > 255 for 5 cycles then stop
    if cpu usage > 95% for 3 cycles then restart
    if failed port 80 protocol http then restart
    group server
    depends on httpd.conf, httpd.bin

 check file httpd.conf 
     with path /usr/local/apache/conf/httpd.conf
     # Reload apache if the httpd.conf file was changed
     if changed checksum 
        then exec "/usr/local/apache/bin/apachectl graceful"

 check file httpd.bin 
     with path /usr/local/apache/bin/httpd
     # Run /watch/dog in the case that the binary was changed
     # and alert in the case that the checksum value recovered
     # later
     if failed checksum then exec "/watch/dog"
        else if recovered then alert

 include /etc/monit/mysql.monitrc
 include /etc/monit/mail/*.monitrc

The above example illustrates a service entry for monitoring the
apache web server process as well as related files. The meaning
of the various statements will be explained in the following
sections.


=head1 LOGGING

Monit will log status and error messages to a log file. Use the
I<set logfile> statement in the monitrc control file. To setup
Monit to log to its own logfile, use e.g. I<set logfile
/var/log/monit.log>. If B<syslog> is given as a value for the
I<-l> command-line switch (or the keyword I<set logfile syslog>
is found in the control file) Monit will use the B<syslog> system
daemon to log messages with a priority assigned to each message
based on the context. To turn off logging, simply do not set the
logfile in the control file (and of course, do not use the -l
switch)


=head1 DAEMON MODE

The I<-d interval> command-line switch runs Monit in daemon
mode. You must specify a numeric argument which is a polling
interval in seconds.

In daemon mode, Monit detaches from the console, puts itself in
the background and runs continuously, monitoring each specified
service and then goes to sleep for the given poll interval.

Simply invoking

              Monit -d 300

will poll all services described in your F<~/.monitrc> file every
5 minutes.

It is strongly recommended to set the poll interval in your
~/.monitrc file instead, by using I<set daemon B<n>>, where B<n>
is an integer number of seconds. If you do this, Monit will
always start in daemon mode (as long as no action arguments are
given). Example (check every 5 minutes):

  set daemon 300

If you need Monit to wait some time at startup before it start
checking services you can use the delay statement. Example (check
every 5 minutes, wait 1 minute on start before first monitoring
cycle):

  set daemon 300 with start delay 60

Monit makes a per-instance lock-file in daemon mode. If you need
more Monit instances, you will need more configuration files,
each pointing to its own lock-file.

Calling I<monit> with a Monit daemon running in the background
sends a wake-up signal to the daemon, forcing it to check
services immediately.

The I<quit> argument will kill a running daemon process instead
of waking it up.


=head1 INIT SUPPORT

Monit can run and be controlled from I<init>. If Monit should
crash, I<init> will re-spawn a new Monit process. Using init to
start Monit is probably the best way to run Monit if you want to
be certain that you always have a running Monit daemon on your
system. (It's obvious, but never the less worth to stress; Make
sure that the control file does not have any syntax errors before
you start Monit from init. Also, make sure that if you run monit
from init, that you do not start Monit from a startup scripts as
well).

To setup Monit to run from init, you can either use the 'set
init' statement in monit's control file or use the -I option from
the command line and here is what you must add to /etc/inittab:

  # Run Monit in standard run-levels
  mo:2345:respawn:/usr/local/bin/Monit -Ic /etc/monitrc

After you have modified init's configuration file, you can run
the following command to re-examine /etc/inittab and start monit:

  telinit q
  
For systems without telinit:

  kill -1 1

If Monit is used to monitor services that are also started at
boot time (e.g. services started via SYSV init rc scripts or via
inittab) then, in some cases, a race condition could occur. That
is; if a service is slow to start, Monit can assume that the
service is not running and possibly try to start it and raise an
alert, while, in fact the service is already about to start or
already in its startup sequence. Please see the FAQ for solutions
to this problem.

=head1 INCLUDE FILES

The Monit control file, I<monitrc>, can include additional
configuration files. This feature helps to maintain a certain
structure or to place repeating settings into one file. Include
statements can be placed at virtually any spot. The syntax is the
following:

  INCLUDE globstring

The globstring is any kind of string as defined in glob(7).
Thus, you can refer to a single file or you can load several
files at once.  In case you want to use whitespace in your string
the globstring need to be embedded into quotes (') or double
quotes ("). For example,

 INCLUDE "/etc/monit/Monit configuration files/printer.*.monitrc"

loads any file matching the single globstring.  If the globstring
matches a directory instead of a file, it is silently ignored.

I<INCLUDE> statements in included files are parsed as in the main
control file.  

If the globstring matches several results, the files are included
in a non sorted manner.  If you need to rely on a certain order,
you might need to use single I<include> statements.

=head1 GROUP SUPPORT

Service entries in the control file, I<monitrc>, can be grouped
together by the I<group> statement. The syntax is simply (keyword
in capital):

  GROUP groupname

With this statement it is possible to group similar service
entries together and manage them as a whole. Monit provides
functions to start, stop, restart, monitor and unmonitor a
group of services, like so:

To start a group of services from the console:

  Monit -g <groupname> start

To stop a group of services:

  Monit -g <groupname> stop

To restart a group of services:

  Monit -g <groupname> restart

Note:
the I<status> and I<summary> commands don't support the -g
option and will print the state of all services.


=head1 MONITORING MODE

Monit supports three monitoring modes per service: I<active>,
I<passive> and I<manual>. See also the example section below for
usage of the mode statement.

In I<active> mode, Monit will monitor a service and in case of
problems Monit will act and raise alerts, start, stop or restart
the service. Active mode is the default mode.

In I<passive> mode, Monit will passively monitor a service and
specifically B<not> try to fix a problem, but it will still raise
alerts in case of a problem.

For use in clustered environments there is also a I<manual>
mode. In this mode, Monit will enter I<active> mode B<only> if a
service was brought under monit's control, for example by
executing the following command in the console:

  Monit start sybase 
  (Monit will call sybase's start method and enable monitoring)

If a service was not started by Monit or was stopped or disabled
for example by:

  Monit stop sybase 
  (Monit will call sybase's stop method and disable monitoring)

Monit will then not monitor the service. This allows for having
services configured in monitrc and start it with Monit only if it
should run. This feature can be used to build a simple failsafe
cluster. To see how, read more about how to setup a cluster with
Monit using the I<heartbeat> system in the examples sections
below.

A service's monitoring state is persistent across Monit restart.
This means that you probably would like to make certain that
services in manual mode are stopped or in unmonitored mode at
server shutdown. Do for instance the following in a server
shutdown script:

  Monit stop sybase

or

  Monit unmonitor sybase

If you use Monit in a HA-cluster you should place the state file
in a temporary filesystem so if the machine should crash and the
stand-by machine take over services, any manual monitoring mode
services that were started on the crashed machine won't be
started on reboot. Use for example:

  set statefile /tmp/monit.state



=head1 ALERT MESSAGES

Monit will raise an email alert in the following situations:

 o A service timed out
 o A service does not exist
 o A service related data access problem
 o A service related program execution problem
 o A service is of invalid object type
 o A icmp problem
 o A port connection problem
 o A resource statement match
 o A file checksum problem
 o A file size problem
 o A file/directory timestamp problem
 o A file/directory/filesystem permission problem
 o A file/directory/filesystem uid problem
 o A file/directory/filesystem gid problem
 o An action is done per administrator's request

Monit will send an alert each time a monitored object changed.
This involves:

 o Monit started, stopped or reloaded
 o A file checksum changed
 o A file size changed
 o A file content match
 o A file/directory timestamp changed
 o A filesystem mount flags changed
 o A process PID changed
 o A process PPID changed

You use the alert statement to notify Monit that you want alert
messages sent to an email address. If you do not specify an alert
statement, Monit will not send alert messages.

There are two forms of alert statement:

 o Global - common for all services
 o Local  - per service

In both cases you can use more than one alert statement. In other
words, you can send many different emails to many different
addresses.

Recipients in the global and in the local lists are alerted when
a service failed, recovered or changed. If the same email address
is in the global and in the local list, Monit will only send one
alert. Local (per service) defined alert email addresses override
global addresses in case of a conflict. Finally, you may choose
to only use a global alert list (recommended), a local per
service list or both.

It is also possible to disable the global alerts locally for
particular service(s) and recipients.

=head2 Setting a global alert statement

If a change occurred on a monitored services, Monit will send an
alert to all recipients in the global list who has registered
interest for the event type. Here is the syntax for the global
alert statement:

=over 4

=item SET ALERT mail-address [ [NOT] {events}] [MAIL-FORMAT 
          {mail-format}] [REMINDER number]

=back

Simply using the following in the global section of monitrc:

 set alert foo@bar

will send a default email to the address foo@bar whenever an
event occurred on any service. Such an event may be that a
service timed out, a service doesn't exist and so on. If you want
to send alert messages to more email addresses, add a I<set alert
'email'> statement for each address.

For explanations of the I<events, MAIL-FORMAT and REMINDER>
keywords above, please see below.

You can also use the NOT option ahead of the events list which
will reverse the meaning of the list. That is, only send alerts
for events I<not> in the list. This can save you some
configuration bytes if you are interested in most events except a
few.


=head2 Setting a local alert statement

Each service can also have its own recipient list.

=over 4

=item ALERT mail-address [ [NOT] {events}] [MAIL-FORMAT 
           {mail-format}] [REMINDER number]

=back

or

=over 4

=item NOALERT mail-address

=back

If you only want an alert message sent for certain events and for
certain service(s), for example only for timeout events or only
if a service died, then postfix the alert-statement with a filter
block:

 check process myproc with pidfile /var/run/my.pid
   alert foo@bar only on { timeout, nonexist } 
   ...

(I<only> and I<on> are noise keywords, ignored by Monit. As a
side note; Noise keywords are used in the control file grammar to
make an entry resemble English and thus make it easier to read
(or, so goes the philosophy). The full set of available noise
keywords are listed below in the Control File section).

You can also setup to send alerts for all events except some by
putting the word I<not> ahead of the list. For example, if you
want to receive alerts for all events except Monit instance
events, you can write (note that the noise words 'but' and 'on'
are optional):

 check system myserver
   alert foo@bar but not on { instance } 
   ...

instead of:

   alert foo@bar on { action
                      checksum
                      content
                      data
                      exec
                      gid
                      icmp
                      invalid
                      fsflags
                      nonexist
                      permission
                      pid
                      ppid
                      size
                      timeout
                      timestamp }

This will send alerts for all events to foo@bar, except Monit
instance events. An instance event BTW, is an event fired
whenever the Monit program start or stop.

Event filtering can be used to send an email to different email
addresses depending on the events that occurred. For instance:

 alert foo@bar { nonexist, timeout, resource, icmp, connection }
 alert security@bar on { checksum, permission, uid, gid }
 alert manager@bar

This will send an alert message to foo@bar whenever a nonexist,
timeout, resource or connection problem occurs and a message to
security@bar if a checksum, permission, uid or gid problem
occurs. And finally, a message to manager@bar whenever any error
event occurs.

Here is the list of events you can use in a mail-filter: I<uid,
gid, size, nonexist, data, icmp, instance, invalid, exec,
content, timeout, resource, checksum, fsflags, timestamp,
connection, permission, pid, ppid, action>

You can also disable the alerts localy using the NOALERT
statement. This is useful if you have lots of services monitored
and are using the global alert statement, but don't want to
receive alerts for some minor subset of services:

 noalert appadmin@bar

For example, if you stick the noalert statement in a 'check
system' entry, you won't receive system related alerts (such as
Monit instance started/stopped/reloaded alert, system overloaded
alert, etc.) but will receive alerts for all other monitored
services.

The following example will alert foo@bar on all events on all
services by default, except the service mybar which will send an
alert only on timeout. The trick is based on the fact that local
definition of the same recipient overrides the global setting
(including registered events and mail format):

 set alert foo@bar
 
 check process myfoo with pidfile /var/run/myfoo.pid
   ...
 check process mybar with pidfile /var/run/mybar.pid
   alert foo@bar only on { timeout }

=head2 Alert message layout

Monit provides a default mail message layout that is short and to
the point. Here's an example of a standard alert mail sent by
monit:

 From: monit@tildeslash.com
 Subject: Monit alert -- Does not exist apache 
 To: hauk@tildeslash.com
 Date: Thu, 04 Sep 2003 02:33:03 +0200

 Does not exist Service apache

        Date:   Thu, 04 Sep 2003 02:33:03 +0200
        Action: restart
        Host:   www.tildeslash.com

 Your faithful employee,
 monit


If you want to, you can change the format of this message with
the optional I<mail-format> statement. The syntax for this
statement is as follows:

 mail-format {
      from: monit@localhost
   subject: $SERVICE $EVENT at $DATE
   message: Monit $ACTION $SERVICE at $DATE on $HOST: $DESCRIPTION.
            Yours sincerely,
            monit
 }

Where the keyword I<from:> is the email address Monit should
pretend it is sending from. It does not have to be a real mail
address, but it must be a proper formated mail address, on the
form: name@domain. The keyword I<subject:> is for the email
subject line. The subject must be on only I<one> line. The
I<message:> keyword denotes the mail body. If used, this keyword
should always be the last in a mail-format statement. The mail
body can be as long as you want, but must B<not> contain the '}'
character.

All of these format keywords are optional, but if used, you must
provide at least one. Thus if you only want to change the from
address Monit is using you can do:

 set alert foo@bar with mail-format { from: bofh@bar.baz }

From the previous example you will notice that some special $XXX
variables were used. If used, they will be substituted and
expanded into the text with these values:

=over 4

=item * I<$EVENT>

 A string describing the event that occurred. The values are
 fixed and are:

 Event:    | Failure state:           | Success state:              
 -------------------------------------------------------------------
 ACTION    | "Action done"            | "Action done"               
 CHECKSUM  | "Checksum failed"        | "Checksum succeeded"        
 CONNECTION| "Connection failed"      | "Connection succeeded"      
 CONTENT   | "Content failed",        | "Content succeeded"
 DATA      | "Data access error"      | "Data access succeeded"     
 EXEC      | "Execution failed"       | "Execution succeeded"       
 FSFLAG    | "Filesystem flags failed"| "Filesystem flags succeeded"
 GID       | "GID failed"             | "GID succeeded"             
 ICMP      | "ICMP failed"            | "ICMP succeeded"            
 INSTANCE  | "Monit instance changed" | "Monit instance changed not"
 INVALID   | "Invalid type"           | "Type succeeded"            
 NONEXIST  | "Does not exist"         | "Exists"                    
 PERMISSION| "Permission failed"      | "Permission succeeded"      
 PID       | "PID failed"             | "PID succeeded"
 PPID      | "PPID failed"            | "PPID succeeded"
 RESOURCE  | "Resource limit matched" | "Resource limit succeeded"  
 SIZE      | "Size failed"            | "Size succeeded"            
 TIMEOUT   | "Timeout"                | "Timeout recovery"          
 TIMESTAMP | "Timestamp failed"       | "Timestamp succeeded"       
 UID       | "UID failed"             | "UID succeeded"             

=item * I<$SERVICE>

 The service entry name in monitrc

=item * I<$DATE> 

 The current time and date (RFC 822 date style).

=item * I<$HOST> 

 The name of the host Monit is running on

=item * I<$ACTION> 

 The name of the action which was done. Action names are fixed
 and are:

 Action:  | Name:
 --------------------
 ALERT    | "alert"
 EXEC     | "exec"
 MONITOR  | "monitor"
 RESTART  | "restart"
 START    | "start"
 STOP     | "stop"
 UNMONITOR| "unmonitor"

=item * I<$DESCRIPTION> 

 The description of the error condition

=back 


=head2 Setting a global mail format 

It is possible to set a standard mail format with the following
global set-statement (keywords are in capital):

=over 4

=item SET MAIL-FORMAT {mail-format}

=back

Format set with this statement will apply to every alert
statement that does I<not> have its own specified mail-format.
This statement is most useful for setting a default from address
for messages sent by monit, like so:

 set mail-format { from: monit@foo.bar.no }


=head2 Setting an error reminder

Monit by default sends just one error notification if a service
failed and another when it recovered. If you want to be notified
more then once if a service remains in a failed state, you can
use the reminder option to the alert statement (keywords are in
capital):

=over 4

=item ALERT ... [WITH] REMINDER [ON] number [CYCLES]

=back

For example if you want to be notified each tenth cycle if a
service remains in a failed state, you can use:

  alert foo@bar with reminder on 10 cycles

Likewise if you want to be notified on each failed cycle, you can
use:

  alert foo@bar with reminder on 1 cycle


=head2 Setting a mail server for alert messages

The mail server Monit should use to send alert messages is
defined with a global set statement (keywords are in capital and
optional statements in [brackets]):

 SET MAILSERVER {hostname|ip-address [PORT port]
                [USERNAME username] [PASSWORD password]
                [using SSLV2|SSLV3|TLSV1] [CERTMD5 checksum]}+ 
                [with TIMEOUT X SECONDS]
                [using HOSTNAME hostname]

The port statement allows to use SMTP servers other then those
listening on port 25. If omitted, port 25 is used unless ssl or
tls is used, in which case port 465 is used by default.

Monit support plain smtp authentication - you can set a username
and a password using the USERNAME and PASSWORD options.

To use secure communication, use the SSLV2, SSLV3 or TLSV1
options, you can also specify the server certificate checksum
using CERTMD5 option.

As you can see, it is possible to set several SMTP servers. If
Monit cannot connect to the first server in the list it will try
the second server and so on. Monit has a default 5 seconds
connection timeout and if the SMTP server is slow, Monit could
timeout when connecting or reading from the server. If this is
the case, you can use the optional timeout statement to explicit
set the timeout to a higher value if needed. Here is an example
for setting several mail servers:

 set mailserver mail.tildeslash.com, mail.foo.bar port 10025
     username "Rabbi" password "Loewe" using tlsv1, localhost
     with timeout 15 seconds

Here Monit will first try to connect to the server
"mail.tildeslash.com", if this server is down Monit will try
"mail.foo.bar" on port 10025 using the given credentials via tls
and finally "localhost". We also set an explicit connect and read
timeout; If Monit cannot connect to the first SMTP server in the
list within 15 seconds it will try the next server and so on. The
I<set mailserver ..> statement is optional and if not defined
Monit will not send email alerts. Not setting a mail server is
recommended only if alert notification is delegated to M/Monit.

Monit, by default, use the local host name in SMTP HELO/EHLO and
in the Message-ID header. Some mail servers check this
information against DNS for spam protection and can reject the
email if the DNS and the hostname used in the transaction does
not match. If this is the case, you can override the default
local host name by using the HOSTNAME option:

 set mailserver mail.tildeslash.com using hostname
     "myhost.example.org"


=head2 Event queue

If the MTA (mail server) for sending alerts is not available,
Monit I<can> queue events on the local file-system until the MTA
recover. Monit will then post queued events in order with their
original timestamp so the events are not lost. This feature is
most useful if Monit is used together with M/Monit and when event
history is important.

The event queue is persistent across monit restarts and provided
that the back-end filesystem is persistent too, across system
restart as well.

By default, the queue is disabled and if the alert handler fails,
Monit will simply drop the alert message. To enable the event
queue, add the following statement to the Monit control file:

 SET EVENTQUEUE BASEDIR <path> [SLOTS <number>]

The <path> is the path to the directory where events will be
stored. Optionally if you want to limit the queue size, use the
slots option to only store up to I<number> event messages. If the
slots option is not used, Monit will store as many events as the
backend filesystem allows.

Example:

  set eventqueue
      basedir /var/monit
      slots 5000

Events are stored in a binary format, with one file per event.
The file size is ca. 130 bytes or a bit more (depending on the
message length). The file name is composed of the unix timestamp,
underscore and the service name, for example:

 /var/monit/1131269471_apache

If you are running more then one Monit instance on the same
machine, you B<must> use separated event queue directories to
avoid sending wrong alerts to the wrong addresses.

If you want to purge the queue by hand, that is, remove queued
event-files, Monit should be stopped before the removal.


=head1 SERVICE TIMEOUT

B<monit> provides a service timeout mechanism for situations
where a service simply refuses to start or respond over a longer
period. In cases like this, and particularly if monit's poll-cycle
is low, Monit will simply increase the machine load by trying to
restart the service.

The timeout mechanism Monit provides is based on two variables,
i.e. the number the service has been started and the number of
poll-cycles. For example, if a service had I<x> restarts within
I<y> poll-cycles (where I<x> <= I<y>) then Monit will timeout and
not (re)start the service on subsequent cycles until the service
is manually re-registered.. If a timeout occurs Monit will send
you an alert message if you have register interest for this event. 

The syntax for the timeout statement is as follows (keywords
are in capital):

=over 4

=item IF NUMBER RESTART NUMBER CYCLE(S) THEN TIMEOUT

=back

Where the first number is the number of service restarts and the
second, the number of poll-cycles. If the number of cycles was
reached without a timeout, the service start-counter is reset to
zero. This provides some granularity to catch exceptional cases
and do a service timeout, but let occasional service start and
restarts happen without having an accumulated timeout.

Here is an example where Monit will timeout (not check the
service) if the service was restarted 2 times within 3 cycles:

 if 2 restarts within 3 cycles then timeout

To have Monit check the service again after a timeout, run 'monit
monitor service' from the command line. This will remove the
timeout lock in the daemon and make the daemon start and check
the service again.


=head1 SERVICE TESTS

Monit provides several tests you may utilize in a service entry
to test a service. There are two classes of tests: variable and
constant tests. That is, the condition we test is either constant
e.g. a number or it can vary.

A constant test has this general format:

=over 4

=item  IF <TEST> [[<X>] [TIMES WITHIN] <Y> CYCLES] THEN ACTION
       [ELSE IF SUCCEEDED [[<X>] [TIMES WITHIN] <Y> CYCLES] 
       THEN ACTION]

=back

If the <TEST> condition should evaluate to true, then the
selected action is executed each cycle the test condition remains
true. The comparison value is constant. Recovery action is
evaluated only once (on a failed to succeeded state change only).
The 'ELSE IF SUCCEEDED' part is optional, if omitted, Monit will
send an alert on recovery. The alert is sent only once on each
state change unless overridden by the 'reminder' alert option.

=over 4

A variable test has this general format:

=item  IF CHANGED <TEST> [[<X>] [TIMES WITHIN] <Y> CYCLES] 
       THEN ACTION

=back

If the <TEST> should evaluate to true, then the selected action
is executed once. The comparison value is a variable where the
last result becomes the new value and is compared in future
cycles. The alert is delivered each time the condition becomes
true.

You can use this test for alerts or for some automatic action,
for example to reload monitored process after its configuration
file was changed. Variable tests are supported for 'checksum',
'size', 'pid, 'ppid' and 'timestamp' tests only.

=over 4

=item  ... [[<X>] [TIMES WITHIN] <Y> CYCLES] ...

=back

If a test match, its action is executed at once. This behaviour
can optionally be changed and you can for instance require that a
test must match over several poll cycles before the action is
executed by using the statement above. You can use this in
several ways. For example:

 if failed port 80 for 3 times within 5 cycles then alert

or

 if failed port 80 for 10 cycles then unmonitor

If you don't specify <X> times, it equals <Y> by default, thus
the test match if it evaluate to true for <Y> consecutive cycles.

It is possible to use this option for failed, succeeded,
recovered or changed rules. Here is a more complex example:

 check filesystem rootfs with path /dev/hda1
  if space usage > 80% for 5 times within 15 cycles 
     then alert else if succeeded for 10 cycles then alert
  if space usage > 90% for 5 cycles then 
     exec '/try/to/free/the/space'
  if space usage > 99% then exec '/stop/processess'


In each test you must select the action to be executed from this
list:

=over 4

=item * 

B<ALERT> sends the user an alert event on each state change (for
constant tests) or on each change (for variable tests).

=item * 

B<RESTART> restarts the service I<and> sends an alert. Restart is
conducted by first calling the service's registered stop method
and then the service's start method.

=item * 

B<START> starts the service by calling the service's registered
start method I<and> send an alert.

=item * 

B<STOP> stops the service by calling the service's registered
stop method I<and> send an alert. If Monit stops a service it
will not be checked by Monit anymore nor restarted again later.
To reactivate monitoring of the service again you must explicitly
enable monitoring from the web interface or from the console,
e.g. 'monit monitor apache'.

=item * 

B<EXEC> can be used to execute an arbitrary program I<and> send
an alert. If you choose this action you must state the program to
be executed and if the program require arguments you must enclose
the program and its arguments in a quoted string. You may
optionally specify the uid and gid the executed program should
switch to upon start. For instance:

 exec "/usr/local/tomcat/bin/startup.sh"
      as uid nobody and gid nobody

The uid and gid switch can be useful if the program to be started
cannot change to a lesser privileged user and group. This is
typically needed for Java Servers. Remember, if Monit is run by
the superuser, then all programs executed by Monit will be
started with superuser privileges unless the uid and gid
extension was used.

=item * 

B<MONITOR> will enable monitoring of the service I<and> send
an alert.

=item * 

B<UNMONITOR> will disable monitoring of the service I<and> send
an alert. The service will not be checked by Monit anymore nor
restarted again later.  To reactivate monitoring of the service
you must explicitly enable monitoring from monit's web interface
or from the console using the monitor argument.

=back



=head2 RESOURCE TESTING

Monit can examine how much system resources a service are using.
This test can only be used within a system or process service
entry in the Monit control file.

Depending on system or process characteristics, services can be
stopped or restarted and alerts can be generated. Thus it is
possible to utilize systems which are idle and to spare system
under high load.

The full syntax for the resource-statements used for resource
testing is as follows (keywords are in capital and optional
statements in [brackets]),

=over 4

=item IF resource operator value [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES] THEN action
      [ELSE IF SUCCEEDED [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES] THEN action]

=back


I<resource> is a choice of "CPU", "TOTALCPU",
"CPU([user|system|wait])", "MEMORY", "CHILDREN", "TOTALMEMORY",
"LOADAVG([1min|5min|15min])". Some resource tests can be used
inside a check system entry, some in a check process entry and
some in both:

System only resource tests:

CPU([user|system|wait]) is the percent of time the system spend
in user or system/kernel space. Some systems such as linux 2.6
supports a 'wait' indicator as well.

Process only resource tests:

CPU is the CPU usage of the process itself (percent).

TOTALCPU is the total CPU usage of the process and its children
in (percent). You will want to use TOTALCPU typically for
services like Apache webserver where one master process forks the
child processes as workers.

CHILDREN is the number of child processes of the process. 

TOTALMEMORY is the memory usage of the process and its child
processes in either percent or as an amount (Byte, kB, MB, GB).

System and process resource tests:

MEMORY is the memory usage of the system or of a process (without
children) in either percent (of the systems total) or as an
amount (Byte, kB, MB, GB).

LOADAVG([1min|5min|15min]) refers to the system's load average.
The load average is the number of processes in the system run
queue, averaged over the specified time period.

I<operator> is a choice of "<", ">", "!=", "==" in C notation,
"gt", "lt", "eq", "ne" in shell sh notation and "greater",
"less", "equal", "notequal" in human readable form (if not
specified, default is EQUAL).

I<value> is either an integer or a real number (except for
CHILDREN). For CPU, TOTALCPU, MEMORY and TOTALMEMORY you need to
specify a I<unit>. This could be "%" or if applicable "B" (Byte),
"kB" (1024 Byte), "MB" (1024 KiloByte) or "GB" (1024 MegaByte).

I<action> is a choice of "ALERT", "RESTART", "START", "STOP",
"EXEC", "MONITOR" or "UNMONITOR".


To calculate the cycles, a counter is raised whenever the
expression above is true and it is lowered whenever it is false
(but not below 0). All counters are reset in case of a restart.

The following is an example to check that the CPU usage of a
service is not going beyond 50% during five poll cycles. If it
does, Monit will restart the service:

 if cpu is greater than 50% for 5 cycles then restart

See also the example section below.



=head2 FILE CHECKSUM TESTING

The checksum statement may only be used in a file service
entry. If specified in the control file, Monit will compute
a md5 or sha1 checksum for a file.

The checksum test in constant form is used to verify that a
file does not change. Syntax (keywords are in capital):

=over 4

=item IF FAILED [MD5|SHA1] CHECKSUM [EXPECT checksum] 
         [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES] THEN action
      [ELSE IF SUCCEEDED [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES] THEN action]

=back

The checksum test in variable form is used to watch for
file changes. Syntax (keywords are in capital):

=over 4

=item IF CHANGED [MD5|SHA1] CHECKSUM [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES] 
      THEN action

=back

The choice of MD5 or SHA1 is optional. MD5 features a 256 bit 
and SHA1 a 320 bit checksum. If this option is omitted Monit 
tries to guess the method from the EXPECT string or uses MD5 as
default.

I<expect> is optional and if used it specifies a md5 or sha1
string Monit should expect when testing a file's checksum. If
I<expect> is used, Monit will not compute an initial checksum for
the file, but instead use the string you submit. For example:

 if failed checksum and 
    expect the sum 8f7f419955cefa0b33a2ba316cba3659
 then alert

You can, for example, use the GNU utility I<md5sum(1)> or 
I<sha1sum(1)> to create a checksum string for a file and 
use this string in the expect-statement.

I<action> is a choice of "ALERT", "RESTART", "START", "STOP",
"EXEC", "MONITOR" or "UNMONITOR".

The checksum statement in variable form may be used to check a
file for changes and if changed, do a specified action. For
instance to reload a server if its configuration file was
changed. The following illustrates this for the apache web
server:

 check file httpd.conf path /usr/local/apache/conf/httpd.conf
     if changed sha1 checksum 
        then exec "/usr/local/apache/bin/apachectl graceful"

If you plan to use the checksum statement for security reasons,
(a very good idea, by the way) and to monitor a file or files
which should not change, then please use the constant form and
also read the DEPENDENCY TREE section below to see a detailed
example on how to do this properly.

Monit can also test the checksum for files on a remote host via
the HTTP protocol. See the CONNECTION TESTING section below.



=head2 TIMESTAMP TESTING

The timestamp statement may only be used in a file, fifo or
directory service entry.

The timestamp test in constant form is used to verify various
timestamp conditions. Syntax (keywords are in capital):

=over 4

=item IF TIMESTAMP [[operator] value [unit]] [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES] 
      THEN action
      [ELSE IF SUCCEEDED [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES] THEN action]

=back

The timestamp statement in variable form is simply to test an
existing file or directory for timestamp changes and if changed,
execute an action. Syntax (keywords are in capital):

=over 4

=item IF CHANGED TIMESTAMP [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES] THEN action

=back

I<operator> is a choice of "<", ">", "!=", "==" in C notation,
"GT", "LT", "EQ", "NE" in shell sh notation and "GREATER",
"LESS", "EQUAL", "NOTEQUAL" in human readable form (if not
specified, default is EQUAL).

I<value> is a time watermark.

I<unit> is either "SECOND", "MINUTE", "HOUR" or "DAY" (it is also
possible to use "SECONDS", "MINUTES", "HOURS", or "DAYS").

I<action> is a choice of "ALERT", "RESTART", "START", "STOP",
"EXEC", "MONITOR" or "UNMONITOR".

The variable timestamp statement is useful for checking a file
for changes and then execute an action. This version was written
particularly with configuration files in mind. For instance, if
you monitor the apache web server you can use this statement to
reload apache if the I<httpd.conf> (apache's configuration file)
was changed. Like so:

 check file httpd.conf with path /usr/local/apache/conf/httpd.conf
   if changed timestamp
      then exec "/usr/local/apache/bin/apachectl graceful"

The constant timestamp version is useful for monitoring systems
able to report its state by changing the timestamp of certain
state files. For instance the I<iPlanet Messaging server stored
process> system updates the timestamp of the following files:

 o stored.ckp
 o stored.lcu
 o stored.per

If a task should fail, the system keeps the timestamp. To report
stored problems you can use the following statements:

 check file stored.ckp with path /msg-foo/config/stored.ckp
   if timestamp > 1 minute then alert

 check file stored.lcu with path /msg-foo/config/stored.lcu
   if timestamp > 5 minutes then alert

 check file stored.per with path /msg-foo/config/stored.per
   if timestamp > 1 hour then alert

As mentioned above, you can also use the timestamp statement for
monitoring directories for changes. If files are added or removed
from a directory, its timestamp is changed:

 check directory mydir path /foo/directory
  if timestamp > 1 hour then alert

or

 check directory myotherdir path /foo/secure/directory
  if timestamp < 1 hour then alert

The following example is a hack for restarting a process after a
certain time. Sometimes this is a necessary workaround for some
third-party applications, until the vendor fix a problem:

 check file server.pid path /var/run/server.pid
       if timestamp > 7 days 
          then exec "/usr/local/server/restart-server"



=head2 FILE SIZE TESTING

The size statement may only be used in a file service entry. If
specified in the control file, Monit will compute a size for a
file.

The size test in constant form is used to verify various size
conditions. Syntax (keywords are in capital):

=over 4

=item IF SIZE [[operator] value [unit]] [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES] 
      THEN action
      [ELSE IF SUCCEEDED [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES] THEN action]

=back

The size statement in variable form is simply to test an existing
file for size changes and if changed, execute an action. Syntax
(keywords are in capital):

=over 4

=item IF CHANGED SIZE [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES] THEN action

=back

I<operator> is a choice of "<", ">", "!=", "==" in C notation,
"GT", "LT", "EQ", "NE" in shell sh notation and "GREATER",
"LESS", "EQUAL", "NOTEQUAL" in human readable form (if not
specified, default is EQUAL).

I<value> is a size watermark.

I<unit> is a choice of "B","KB","MB","GB" or long alternatives
"byte", "kilobyte", "megabyte", "gigabyte". If it is not
specified, "byte" unit is assumed by default.

I<action> is a choice of "ALERT", "RESTART", "START", "STOP",
"EXEC", "MONITOR" or "UNMONITOR".

The variable size test form is useful for checking a file for
changes and send an alert or execute an action. Monit will
register the size of the file at startup and monitor the file for
changes. As soon as the value changes, Monit will perform the
specified action, reset the registered value to the new value and
continue monitoring and test if the size changes again.

One example of use for this statement is to conduct security
checks, for instance:

 check file su with path /bin/su
       if changed size then exec "/sbin/ifconfig eth0 down"

which will "cut the cable" and stop a possible intruder from
compromising the system further. This test is just one of many
you may use to increase the security awareness on a system. If
you plan to use Monit for security reasons we recommend that you
use this test in combination with other supported tests like
checksum, timestamp, and so on.

The constant form of this test can be useful in similar or
different contexts. It can, for instance, be used to test if a
certain file size was exceeded and then alert you or Monit may
execute a certain action specified by you. An example is to use
this statement to rotate log files after they have reached a
certain size or to check that a database file does not grow
beyond a specified threshold.

To rotate a log file:

 check file myapp.log with path /var/log/myapp.log
    if size > 50 MB then 
       exec "/usr/local/bin/rotate /var/log/myapp.log myapp"

where /usr/local/bin/rotate may be a simple script, such as:

 #/bin/bash
 /bin/mv $1 $1.`date +%y-%m-%d`
 /usr/bin/pkill -HUP $2

Or you may use this statement to trigger the logrotate(8)
program, to do an "emergency" rotate. Or to send an alert if a
file becomes a known bottleneck if it grows behind a certain size
because of limits in a database engine:

 check file mydb with path /data/mydatabase.db
       if size > 1 GB then alert

This is a more restrictive form of the first example where the
size is explicitly defined (note that the real su size is system
dependent):

 check file su with path /bin/su
       if size != 95564 then exec "/sbin/ifconfig eth0 down"


=head2 FILE CONTENT TESTING

The match statement allows you to test the content of a text file
by using regular expressions. This is a great feature if you need
to periodically test files, such as log files, for certain
patterns. If a pattern match, Monit defaults to raise an alert,
other actions are also possible.

The syntax (keywords in capital) for using this test is:

=over 4

=item IF [NOT] MATCH {regex|path} [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES] THEN action

=back

I<regex> is a string containing the extended regular expression.
See also regex(7).

I<path> is an absolute path to a file containing extended
regular expression on every line. See also regex(7).

I<action> is a choice of "ALERT", "RESTART", "START", "STOP",
"EXEC", "MONITOR" or "UNMONITOR".

You can use the I<NOT> statement to invert a match.

The content is only being checked every cycle. If content is
being added and removed between two checks they are unnoticed.

On startup the read position is set to the end of the file 
and Monit continue to scan to the end of file on each cycle. 
But if the file size should decrease or inode change the read 
position is set to the start of the file.

Only lines ending with a newline character are inspected. Thus,
lines are being ignored until they have been completed with this
character. Also note that only the first 511 characters of a line
are inspected.

=over 4

=item IGNORE [NOT] MATCH {regex|path}

=back

Lines matching an I<IGNORE> are not inspected during later 
evaluations. I<IGNORE MATCH> has always precedence over 
I<IF MATCH>.

All I<IGNORE MATCH> statements are evaluated first, in the 
order of their appearance. Thereafter, all the I<IF MATCH> 
statements are evaluated.

A real life example might look like this:

  check file syslog with path /var/log/syslog
    ignore match 
        "^\w{3} [ :0-9]{11} [._[:alnum:]-]+ monit\[[0-9]+\]:"
    ignore match /etc/monit/ignore.regex
    if match 
        "^\w{3} [ :0-9]{11} [._[:alnum:]-]+ mrcoffee\[[0-9]+\]:"
    if match /etc/monit/active.regex then alert



=head2 FILESYSTEM FLAGS TESTING

Monit can test the flags of a filesystem for changes. This test
is implicit and Monit will send alert in case of failure by
default.

This test is useful for detecting changes of the filesystem flags
such as when the filesystem became read-only based on disk errors
or the mount flags were changed (such as nosuid). Each platform
provides different set of flags. POSIX define the RDONLY and
NOSUID flags which should work on all platforms. Some platforms
(such as FreeBSD) has additonal flags.

The syntax for the fsflags statement is:

=over 4

=item IF CHANGED FSFLAGS [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES] THEN action

=back

I<action> is a choice of "ALERT", "RESTART", "START", "STOP",
"EXEC", "MONITOR" or "UNMONITOR".

Example:

 check filesystem rootfs with path /
       if changed fsflags then exec "/my/script"
       alert root@localhost



=head2 SPACE TESTING

Monit can test file systems for space usage. This test may only
be used within a filesystem service entry in the Monit control
file.

Monit will check a filesystem's total space usage. If you only
want to check available space for non-superuser, you must set the
watermark appropriately (i.e. total space minus reserved blocks
for the superuser).

You can obtain (and set) the superuser's reserved blocks size,
for example by using the tune2fs utility on Linux. On Linux 5% of
available blocks are reserved for the superuser by default. On
solaris 10% of the blocks are reserved. You can also use tunefs
on solaris to change values on a live filesystem.

The full syntax for the space statement is:

=over 4

=item IF SPACE operator value unit [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES] THEN action
      [ELSE IF SUCCEEDED [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES] THEN action]

=back

I<operator> is a choice of "<",">","!=","==" in c notation, "gt",
"lt", "eq", "ne" in shell sh notation and "greater", "less",
"equal", "notequal" in human readable form (if not specified,
default is EQUAL).

I<unit> is a choice of "B","KB","MB","GB", "%" or long
alternatives "byte", "kilobyte", "megabyte", "gigabyte",
"percent".

I<action> is a choice of "ALERT", "RESTART", "START", "STOP",
"EXEC", "MONITOR" or "UNMONITOR".


=head2 INODE TESTING

If supported by the file-system, you can use Monit to test for
inodes usage. This test may only be used within a filesystem
service entry in the Monit control file.

If the filesystem becomes unavailable, Monit will call the
service's registered start method, if it is defined and if Monit
is running in active mode. If Monit runs in passive mode or the
start methods is not defined, Monit will just send an error
alert.

The syntax for the inode statement is:

=over 4

=item IF INODE(S) operator value [unit] [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES] 
      THEN action
      [ELSE IF SUCCEEDED [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES] THEN action]

=back

I<operator> is a choice of "<",">","!=","==" in c notation, "gt",
"lt", "eq", "ne" in shell sh notation and "greater", "less",
"equal", "notequal" in human readable form (if not specified,
default is EQUAL).

I<unit> is optional. If not specified, the value is an absolute
count of inodes. You can use the "%" character or the longer
alternative "percent" as a unit.

I<action> is a choice of "ALERT", "RESTART", "START", "STOP",
"EXEC", "MONITOR" or "UNMONITOR".


=head2 PERMISSION TESTING

Monit can monitor the permission of file objects. This test may
only be used within a file, fifo, directory or filesystem service
entry in the Monit control file.

The syntax for the permission statement is:

=over 4

=item IF FAILED PERM(ISSION) octalnumber [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES] 
      THEN action
      [ELSE IF SUCCEEDED [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES] THEN action]

=back


I<octalnumber> defines permissions for a file, a directory or a
filesystem as four octal digits (0-7). Valid range: 0000 - 7777 (you
can omit the leading zeros, Monit will add the zeros to the left
thus for example "640" is valid value and matches "0640").

I<action> is a choice of "ALERT", "RESTART", "START", "STOP",
"EXEC", "MONITOR" or "UNMONITOR".

The web interface will show a permission warning if the test
failed.

We recommend that you use the UNMONITOR action in a permission
statement. The rationale for this feature is security and that
Monit does not start a possible cracked program or script.
Example:

 check file monit.bin with path "/usr/local/bin/monit"
       if failed permission 0555 then unmonitor

If the test fails, Monit will simply send an alert and stop
monitoring the file and propagate an unmonitor action upward in
a depend tree.


=head2 UID TESTING

Monit can monitor the owner user id (uid) of a file object. This
test may only be used within a file, fifo, directory or
filesystem service entry in the Monit control file.

The syntax for the uid statement is:

=over 4

=item IF FAILED UID user [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES] THEN action
      [ELSE IF SUCCEEDED [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES] THEN action]

=back

I<user> defines a user id either in numeric or in string form.

I<action> is a choice of "ALERT", "RESTART", "START", "STOP",
"EXEC", "MONITOR" or "UNMONITOR".


The web interface will show a uid warning if the test should
fail.

We recommend that you use the UNMONITOR action in a uid
statement. The rationale for this feature is security and that
Monit does not start a possible cracked program or script.
Example:

 check file passwd with path /etc/passwd
       if failed uid root then unmonitor

If the test fails, Monit will simply send an alert and stop
monitoring the file and propagate an unmonitor action upward in
a depend tree.


=head2 GID TESTING

Monit can monitor the owner group id (gid) of file objects. This
test may only be used within a file, fifo, directory or
filesystem service entry in the Monit control file.

The syntax for the gid statement is:

=over 4

=item IF FAILED GID user [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES] THEN action
      [ELSE IF SUCCEEDED [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES] THEN action]

=back


I<user> defines a group id either in numeric or in string form.

I<action> is a choice of "ALERT", "RESTART", "START", "STOP",
"EXEC", "MONITOR" or "UNMONITOR".


The web interface will show a gid warning if the test should
fail.

We recommend that you use the UNMONITOR action in a gid
statement. The rationale for this feature is security and that
Monit does not start a possible cracked program or script.
Example:

 check file shadow with path /etc/shadow
       if failed gid root then unmonitor

If the test fails, Monit will simply send an alert and stop
monitoring the file and propagate an unmonitor action upward in
a depend tree.



=head2 PID TESTING

Monit can test the process identification number (pid) of a
process for changes. This test is implicit and Monit will send a
alert in the case of failure by default.

The syntax for the pid statement is:

=over 4

=item IF CHANGED PID [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES] THEN action

=back

I<action> is a choice of "ALERT", "RESTART", "START", "STOP",
"EXEC", "MONITOR" or "UNMONITOR".

This test is useful to detect possible process restarts which has
occurred in the timeframe between two Monit testing cycles. In
the case that the restart was fast and the process provides
expected service (i.e. all tests succeeded) you will be notified
that the process was replaced.

For example sshd daemon can restart very quickly, thus if someone
changes its configuration and do sshd restart outside of Monit's
control you will be notified that the process was replaced by a
new instance (or you can optionaly do some other action such as
preventively stop sshd).

Another example is a MySQL Cluster which has its own watchdog
with process restart ability. You can use Monit for redundant
monitoring. 

Example:

 check process sshd with pidfile /var/run/sshd.pid
       if changed pid then exec "/my/script"



=head2 PPID TESTING

Monit can test the process parent process identification number
(ppid) of a process for changes. This test is implicit and Monit
will send alert in the case of failure by default.

The syntax for the ppid statement is:

=over 4

=item IF CHANGED PPID [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES] THEN action

=back

I<action> is a choice of "ALERT", "RESTART", "START", "STOP",
"EXEC", "MONITOR" or "UNMONITOR".

This test is useful for detecting changes of a process parent.

Example:

 check process myproc with pidfile /var/run/myproc.pid
       if changed ppid then exec "/my/script"



=head2 CONNECTION TESTING

Monit is able to perform connection testing via networked ports
or via Unix sockets. A connection test may only be used within a
process or within a host service entry in the Monit control file.

If a service listens on one or more sockets, Monit can connect to
the port (using either tcp or udp) and verify that the service
will accept a connection and that it is possible to write and
read from the socket. If a connection is not accepted or if there
is a problem with socket i/o, Monit will assume that something is
wrong and execute a specified action. If Monit is compiled with
openssl, then ssl based network services can also be tested.

The full syntax for the statement used for connection testing is
as follows (keywords are in capital and optional statements in
[brackets]),

=over 4

=item IF FAILED [host] port [type] 
	 [protocol|{send/expect}+] [timeout] [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES]
      THEN action
      [ELSE IF SUCCEEDED [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES] THEN action]

=back

or for Unix sockets,

=over 4

=item  IF FAILED [unixsocket] [type] 
          [protocol|{send/expect}+] [timeout] [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES]
       THEN action
      [ELSE IF SUCCEEDED [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES] THEN action]

=back

B<host:HOST hostname>. Optionally specify the host to connect to.
If the host is not given then localhost is assumed if this test
is used inside a process entry. If this test was used inside a
remote host entry then the entry's remote host is assumed.
Although I<host> is intended for testing name based virtual host
in a HTTP server running on local or remote host, it does allow
the connection statement to be used to test a server running on
another machine. This may be useful; For instance if you use
Apache httpd as a front-end and an application-server as the
back-end running on another machine, this statement may be used
to test that the back-end server is running and if not raise an
alert.

B<port:PORT number>. The port number to connect to

B<unixsocket:UNIXSOCKET PATH>. Specifies the path to a Unix
socket. Servers based on Unix sockets, always runs on the local
machine and does not use a port.

B<type:TYPE {TCP|UDP|TCPSSL}>. Optionally specify the socket type
Monit should use when trying to connect to the port. The
different socket types are; TCP, UDP or TCPSSL, where TCP is a
regular stream based socket, UDP is a datagram socket and TCPSSL
specify that Monit should use a TCP socket with SSL when
connecting to a port. The default socket type is TCP. If TCPSSL
is used you may optionally specify the SSL/TLS protocol to be
used and the md5 sum of the server's certificate. The TCPSSL
options are:

 TCPSSL [SSLAUTO|SSLV2|SSLV3|TLSV1] [CERTMD5 md5sum]

B<proto(col):PROTO {protocols}>. Optionally specify the protocol
Monit should speak when a connection is established. At the
moment Monit knows how to speak:
 I<APACHE-STATUS>
 I<DNS>
 I<DWP>
 I<FTP>
 I<GPS>
 I<HTTP>
 I<IMAP>
 I<CLAMAV>
 I<LDAP2>
 I<LDAP3>
 I<LMTP>
 I<MYSQL>
 I<NNTP>
 I<NTP3>
 I<POP>
 I<POSTFIX-POLICY>
 I<RADIUS>
 I<RDATE>
 I<RSYNC>
 I<SIP>
 I<SMTP>
 I<SSH>
 I<TNS>
 I<PGSQL>
If you have compiled Monit with ssl support, Monit can also speak
the SSL variants such as:
 I<HTTPS>
 I<FTPS>
 I<POPS>
 I<IMAPS>
To use the SSL protocol support you need to define the socket as
SSL and use the general protocol name (for example in the case of
HTTPS) :
 TYPE TCPSSL PROTOCOL HTTP
If the server's protocol is not found in this list, simply do not
specify the protocol and Monit will utilize a default test,
including test if it is possible to read and write to the
port. This default test is in most cases more than good enough to
deduce if the server behind the port is up or not.

The protocol statement is:

 [PROTO(COL) {name} [REQUEST {"/path"} [with CHECKSUM checksum]]

As you can see, you may specify a request after the protocol, at
the moment only the HTTP protocol supports the request option.
See also below for an example.

In addition to the standard protocols, the I<APACHE-STATUS>
protocol is a test of a specific server type, rather than a
generic protocol. Server performance is examined using the status
page generated by Apache's mod_status, which is expected to be at
its default address of http://www.example.com/server-status.
Currently the I<APACHE-STATUS> protocol examines the percentage
of Apache child processes which are

 o logging (loglimit)
 o closing connections (closelimit)
 o performing DNS lookups (dnslimit)
 o in keepalive with a client (keepalivelimit)
 o replying to a client (replylimit)
 o receiving a request (requestlimit)
 o initialising (startlimit)
 o waiting for incoming connections (waitlimit)
 o gracefully closing down (gracefullimit)
 o performing cleanup procedures (cleanuplimit)

Each of these quantities can be compared against a value relative
to the total number of active Apache child processes. If the
comparison expression is true the chosen action is performed.

The apache-status protocol statement is formally defined as
(keywords in uppercase):

 PROTO(COL) {limit} OP PERCENT [OR {limit} OP PERCENT]*

where {limit} is one or more of: loglimit, closelimit, dnslimit,
keepalivelimit, replylimit, requestlimit, startlimit, waitlimit
gracefullimit or cleanuplimit. The operator OP is one of:
[<|=|>].

You can combine all of these test into one expression or you can
choose to test a certain limit. If you combine the limits you
must or' them together using the OR keyword.

Here's an example were we test for a loglimit more than 10
percent, a dnslimit over 25 percent and a wait limit less than 20
percent of processes. See also more examples below in the example
section.

 protocol apache-status 
		loglimit > 10% or
		dnslimit > 50% or
		waitlimit < 20%
 then alert

Obviously, do not use this test unless the httpd server you are
testing is Apache Httpd and mod_status is activated on the
server.


B<send/expect: {SEND|EXPECT} "string" ...>. If Monit does not
support the protocol spoken by the server, you can write your own
protocol-test using I<send> and I<expect> strings. The I<SEND>
statement sends a string to the server port and the I<EXPECT>
statement compares a string read from the server with the string
given in the expect statement. If your system supports POSIX
regular expressions, you can use regular expressions in the
expect string, see regex(7) to learn more about the types of
regular expressions you can use in an expect string. Otherwise
the string is used as it is. The send/expect statement is:

 [{SEND|EXPECT} "string"]+

Note that Monit will send a string as it is, and you B<must>
remember to include CR and LF in the string sent to the server if
the protocol expect such characters to terminate a string (most
text based protocols used over Internet does). Likewise monit
will read up to 256 bytes from the server and use this string
when comparing the expect string. If the server sends strings
terminated by CRLF, (i.e. "\r\n") you I<may> remember to add the
same terminating characters to the string you expect from the
server.

As mentioned above, Monit limits the expect input to 255 bytes.
You can override the default value by using this set statement at
the top of the Monit configuration file:

 SET EXPECTBUFFER <number> ["b"|"kb"|"mb"]

For example, to set the expect buffer to read 10 kilobytes:

 set expectbuffer 10 kb

Note, if you want to test the number of bytes returned from the
server you need to work around a bound check limit in POSIX
regex. You cannot use something like expect ".{5000}" as the max
number in a boundary check usually is {255}. However this should
work, expect "(.{250}){20}"

You can use non-printable characters in a send string if needed.
Use the hex notation, \0xHEXHEX to send any char in the range
\0x00-\0xFF, that is, 0-255 in decimal. This may be useful when
testing some network protocols, particularly those over UDP. For
example, to test a quake 3 server you can use the following,

      send "\0xFF\0xFF\0xFF\0xFFgetstatus"
      expect "sv_floodProtect|sv_maxPing"

Finally, send/expect can be used with any socket type, such as
TCP sockets, UNIX sockets and UDP sockets.

B<timeout:with TIMEOUT x SECONDS>. Optionally specifies the
connect and read timeout for the connection. If Monit cannot
connect to the server within this time it will assume that the
connection failed and execute the specified action. The default
connect timeout is 5 seconds.

I<action> is a choice of "ALERT", "RESTART", "START", "STOP",
"EXEC", "MONITOR" or "UNMONITOR".


=head4 Connection testing using the URL notation

You can test a HTTP server using the compact URL syntax. This
test also allow you to use POSIX regular expressions to test the
content returned by the HTTP server.

The full syntax for the URL statement is as follows (keywords are
in capital and optional statements in [brackets]):

  IF FAILED URL ULR-spec
     [CONTENT {==|!=} "regular-expression"]
     [TIMEOUT number SECONDS] [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES] 
     THEN action
     [ELSE IF SUCCEEDED [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES] THEN action]

Where URL-spec is an URL on the standard form as specified in RFC
2396:

 <protocol>://<authority><path>?<query>

Here is an example of an URL where all components are used:

 http://user:password@www.foo.bar:8080/document/?querystring#ref

If a username and password is included in the URL Monit will
attempt to login at the server using B<Basic Authentication>.

Testing the content returned by the server is optional. If used,
you can test if the content B<match> or does B<not match> a
regular expression. Here's an example on how the URL statement
can be used in a I<check service>:

 check host FOO with address www.foo.bar
      if failed url 
         http://user:password@www.foo.bar:8080/?querystring
         and content == 'action="j_security_check"'
      then ...

Monit will look at the content-length header returned by the
server and download this amount before testing the content. That
is, if the content-length is more than 1Mb or this header is not
set by the server Monit will default to download up to 1 Mb and
not more.

Only the http(s) protocol is supported in an URL statement. If
the protocol is B<https> Monit will use SSL when connecting to
the server.


=head4 Remote host ping test

In addition Monit can perform ICMP Echo tests in remote host
checks. The icmp test may only be used in a check host entry and
Monit must run with super user privileges, that is, the root user
must run monit. The reason is that the icmp test utilize a raw
socket to send the icmp packet and only the super user is allowed
to create a raw socket.

The full syntax for the ICMP Echo statement used for ping testing
is as follows (keywords are in capital and optional statements in
[brackets]):

  IF FAILED ICMP TYPE ECHO
     [COUNT number] [WITH] [TIMEOUT number SECONDS] 
       [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES]
     THEN action
     [ELSE IF SUCCEEDED [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES] THEN action]

The rules for action and timeout are the same as those mentioned
above in the CONNECTION TESTING section. The count parameter
specifies how many consecutive echo requests will be send to the
host in one cycle. In the case that no reply came within timeout
frame, Monit reports error. When at least one reply was received,
the test will pass. Monit sends by default three echo requests in
one cycle to prevent the random packet loss from generating false
alarm (i.e. up to 66% packet loss is tolerated). You can set the
count option to a value between 1 and 20, which can serve as an 
error ratio. For example if you require 100% ping success, set 
the count to 1 (i.e. just one request will be sent, and if the
packet was lost an error will be reported). 

An icmp ping test is useful for testing if a host is up, before
testing ports at the host. If an icmp ping test is used in a
check host entry, this test is run first and if the ping test
should fail we assume that the connection to the host is down and
Monit does I<not> continue to test any ports. Here's an example:

 check host xyzzy with address xyzzy.org
       if failed icmp type echo count 5 with timeout 15 seconds 
          then alert
       if failed port 80 proto http then alert
       if failed port 443 type TCPSSL proto http then alert
       alert foo@bar

In this case, if the icmp test should fail you will get I<one>
alert and only one alert as long as the host is down, and equally
important, Monit will I<not> test port 80 and port 443. Likewise
if the icmp ping test should succeed (again) Monit will continue
to test both port 80 and 443.

Keep in mind though that some firewalls can block icmp packages
and thus render the test useless.


=head4 Examples

To check a port connection and receive an alert if Monit cannot
connect to the port, use the following statement:

  if failed port 80 then alert

In this case the machine in question is assumed to be the default
host. For a process entry it's I<localhost> and for a remote host
entry it's the I<address> of the remote host. Monit will conduct
a tcp connection to the host at port 80 and use tcp by default.
If you want to connect with udp, you can specify this after the
port-statement;

 if failed port 53 type udp protocol dns then alert

Monit will stop trying to connect to the port after 5 seconds and
assume that the server behind the port is down. You may increase
or decrease the connect timeout by explicit add a connection
timeout. In the following example the timeout is increased to 15
seconds and if Monit cannot connect to the server within 15
seconds the test will fail and an alert message is sent.

  if failed port 80 with timeout 15 seconds then alert

If a server is listening to a Unix socket the following statement
can be used:

 if failed unixsocket /var/run/sophie then alert

A Unix socket is used by some servers for fast (interprocess)
communication on localhost only. A Unix socket is specified by a
path and in the example above the path, /var/run/sophie,
specifies a Unix socket.

If your machine answers for several virtual hosts you can prefix
the port statement with a host-statement like so:

 if failed host www.sol.no port 80 then alert
 if failed host 80.69.226.133 port 443 then alert
 if failed host kvasir.sol.no port 80 then alert

And as mentioned above, if you do not specify a host-statement,
I<localhost> or I<address> is assumed.

Monit also knows how to speak some of the more popular Internet
protocols. So, besides testing for connections, Monit can also
speak with the server in question to verify that the server
works. For example, the following is used to test a http server:

 if failed host www.tildeslash.com port 80 proto http 
    then restart

Some protocols also support a request statement. This statement
can be used to ask the server for a special document entity. 

Currently B<only> the I<HTTP> protocol module supports the
request statement, such as:

 if failed host www.myhost.com port 80 protocol http 
    and request "/data/show.php?a=b&c=d"
 then restart

The request must contain an URI string specifying a document from
the http server. The string will be URL encoded by Monit before
it sends the request to the http server, so it's okay to use URL
unsafe characters in the request. If the request statement isn't
specified, the default web server page will be requested.

You can also test the checksum for documents returned by a http
server.  You can use either MD5 sums:

 if failed port 80 protocol http 
    and request "/page.html"
        with checksum 8f7f419955cefa0b33a2ba316cba3659 
 then alert

Or you can use SHA1 sums:

 if failed port 80 protocol http 
    and request "/page.html"
        with checksum e428302e260e0832007d82de853aa8edf19cd872 
 then alert

Monit will compute a checksum (either MD5 or SHA1 is used,
depending on length of the hash) for the document (in the above
case, /page.html) and compare the computed checksum with the
expected checksum. If the sums does not match then the if-tests
action is performed, in this case alert. Note that Monit will
B<not> test the checksum for a document if the server does not
set the HTTP I<Content-Length> header. A HTTP server should set
this header when it server a static document (i.e. a file). A
server will often use chunked transfer encoding instead when
serving dynamic content (e.g. a document created by a CGI-script
or a Servlet), but to test the checksum for dynamic content is
not very useful. There are no limitation on the document size,
but keep in mind that Monit will use time to download the
document over the network so it's probably smart not to ask monit
to compute a checksum for documents larger than 1Mb or so,
depending on you network connection of course. Tip; If you get a
checksum error even if the document has the correct sum, the
reason may be that the download timed out. In this case, explicit
set a longer timeout than the default 5 seconds.

As mentioned above, if the server protocol is not supported by
Monit you can write your own protocol test using send/expect
strings. Here we show a protocol test using send/expect for an
imaginary "Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves" protocol:

 if failed host cave.persia.ir port 4040
    send "Open, Sesame!\r\n"
    expect "Please enter the cave\r\n"
    send "Shut, Sesame!\r\n"
    expect "See you later [A-Za-z ]+\r\n"
 then restart

The I<TCPSSL> statement can optionally test the md5 sum of the
server's certificate. You must state the md5 certificate string
you expect the server to deliver and upon a connect to the
server, the server's actual md5 sum certificate string is tested.
Any other symbol but [A-Fa-f0-9] is being ignored in that sting.
Thus it is possible to copy and paste the output of e.g. openssl.
If they do not match, the connection test fails. If the ssl
version handshake does not work properly you can also force a
specific ssl version, as we demonstrate in this example:

 if failed host shop.sol.no port 443 
    type TCPSSL SSLV3 # Force Monit to use ssl version 3
    # We expect the server to return this  md5 certificate sum
    # as either 12-34-56-78-90-AB-CD-EF-12-34-56-78-90-AB-CD-EF
    # or e.g.   1234567890ABCDEF1234567890ABCDEF
    # or e.g.   1234567890abcdef1234567890abcdef
    # what ever come in more handy (see text above)
    CERTMD5 12-34-56-78-90-AB-CD-EF-12-34-56-78-90-AB-CD-EF
    protocol http 
 then restart

Here's an example where a connection test is used inside a
process entry:

 check process apache with pidfile /var/run/apache.pid
       start program = "/etc/init.d/httpd start"
       stop program = "/etc/init.d/httpd stop"
       if failed host www.tildeslash.com port 80 then restart

Here, a connection test is used in a remote host entry:

 check host up2date with address ftp.redhat.com
       if failed port 21 and protocol ftp then alert

Since we did not explicit specify a host in the above test, monit
will connect to port 21 at ftp.redhat.com. Apropos, the host
address can be specified as a dotted IP address string or as
hostname in the DNS. The following is exactly[*] the same test,
but here an ip address is used instead:

 check host up2date with address 66.187.232.30
       if failed port 21 and protocol ftp then alert

[*] Well, not quite, since we specify an ip-address directly we
will bypass any DNS round-robin setup, but that's another story.

=head4 Testing the SIP protocol 

The SIP protocol is used by communication platform servers such
as Asterisk and FreeSWITCH.

The SIP test is similar to the other protocol tests, but in
addition allows extra optional parameters. 

=over 4

=item  IF FAILED [host] [port] [type] PROTOCOL sip 
        [AND] [TARGET valid@uri] [AND] [MAXFORWARD n]
       THEN action
      [ELSE IF SUCCEEDED [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES] THEN action]

=back

TARGET : 
you may specify an alternative recipient for the message,
by adding a valid sip uri after this keyword.

MAXFORWARD :
Limit the number of proxies or gateways that can forward the
request to the next server. It's value is an integer in the range
0-255, set by default to 70. If max-forward = 0, the next server
may respond 200 OK (test succeeded) or send a 483 Too Many Hops
(test failed)

SIP examples:

 check host openser_all with address 127.0.0.1
   if failed port 5060 type udp protocol sip 
      with target "localhost:5060" and maxforward 6
   then alert
  
If sips is supported, that is, sip over ssl, specify tcpssl as
the connection type. 

 check host fwd.pulver.com with address fwd.pulver.com
   if failed port 5060 type tcpssl protocol SIP 
      and target 613@fwd.pulver.com maxforward 10 
   then alert

For more examples, see the example section below.


=head4 Testing the RADIUS protocol

The SIP test is similar to the other protocol tests, but in
addition allows extra optional parameters.

=over 4

=item  IF FAILED [host] [port] [type] PROTOCOL radius [SECRET string] THEN action
       [ELSE IF SUCCEEDED [[<X>] <Y> CYCLES] THEN action]

=back

SECRET:
you may specify an alternative secret, default is "testing123".

RADIUS example:

 check process radiusd with pidfile /home/aland/git/2_1_x/raddb/radiusd.pid
       start program = "/etc/init.d/freeradius start"
       stop program = "/etc/init.d/freeradius stop"
       if failed host 127.0.0.1 port 2000 type udp protocol radius secret testing1234 then alert
       if 5 restarts within 5 cycles then timeout


=head1 MONIT HTTPD

If specified in the control file, Monit will start a Monit daemon
with http support. From a Browser you can then start and stop
services, disable or enable service monitoring as well as view
the status of each service. Also, if Monit logs to its own file,
you can view the content of this logfile in a Browser.

The control file statement for starting a Monit daemon with http
support is a global set-statement:

=over 4

=item  set httpd port 2812

=back

And you can use this URL, I<http://localhost:2812/>, to access
the daemon from a browser. The port number, in this case 2812,
can be any number that you are allowed to bind to.

If you have compiled Monit with openssl, you can also start the
httpd server with ssl support, using the following expression:

 set httpd port 2812
     ssl enable
     pemfile /etc/certs/monit.pem

And you can use this URL, I<https://localhost:2812/>, to access
the Monit web server over an ssl encrypted connection.

The pemfile, in the example above, holds both the server's
private key and certificate. This file should be stored in a safe
place on the filesystem and should have strict permissions, that
is, no more than 0700.

In addition, if you want to check for client certificates you can
use the CLIENTPEMFILE statement. In this case, a connecting
client has to provided a certificate known by Monit in order to
connect. This file also needs to have all necessary CA
certificates. A configuration could look like:

 set httpd port 2812
     ssl enable
     pemfile /etc/certs/monit.pem
     clientpemfile /etc/certs/monit-client.pem

By default self signed client certificates are not allowed. If
you want to use a self signed certificate from a client it has to
be allowed explicitly with the ALLOWSELFCERTIFICATION statement.

For more information on how to use Monit with SSL and for more
information about certificates and generating pem files, please
consult the README.SSL file accompanying the software.

If you only want the http server to accept connect requests to
one host addresses you can specify the bind address either as an
IP number string or as a hostname. In the following example we
bind the http server to the loopback device. In other words the
http server will only be reachable from localhost:

  set httpd port 2812 and use the address 127.0.0.1

or

  set httpd port 2812 and use the address localhost

If you do not use the ADDRESS statement the http server will
accept connections on any/all local addresses.

It is possible to hide monit's httpd server version, which 
usually is available in httpd header responses and in error 
pages. 

  set httpd port 2812
    ...
    signature {enable|disable}

Use I<disable> to hide the server signature - Monit will only
report its name (e.g. 'monit' instead of for example 'monit
4.2'). By default the version signature is enabled. It is worth
to stress that this option provides no security advantage and 
falls into the "security through obscurity" category.

If you remove the httpd statement from the config file, monit
will stop the httpd server on configuration reload. Likewise if
you change the port number, Monit will restart the http server
using the new specified port number.

The status page displayed by the Monit web server is
automatically refreshed with the same poll time set for the monit
daemon.


B<Note:>

We strongly recommend that you start Monit with http support (and
bind the server to localhost, only, unless you are behind a
firewall). The built-in web-server is small and does not use much
resources, and more I<importantly>, Monit can use the http server
for interprocess communication between a Monit client and a monit
daemon.

For instance, you I<must> start a Monit daemon with http support
if you want to be able to use most of the available console
commands. I.e. 'Monit stop all', 'Monit start all' etc.

If a Monit daemon is running in the background we will ask the
daemon (via the HTTP protocol) to execute the above commands.
That is, the daemon is requested to start and stop the services.
This ensures that a daemon will not restart a service that you
requested to stop and that (any) timeout lock will be removed
from a service when you start it.


=head2 Monit HTTPD Authentication

Monit supports two types of authentication schema's for
connecting to the httpd server, (three, if you count SSL client
certificate validation). Both schema's can be used together or by
itself. You B<must> choose at least one.

=head4 Host and network allow list

The http server maintains an access-control list of hosts and
networks allowed to connect to the server. You can add as many
hosts as you want to, but only hosts with a valid domain name or
its IP address are allowed. Networks require a network IP and a
netmask to be accepted.

The http server will query a name server to check any hosts
connecting to the server. If a host (client) is trying to connect
to the server, but cannot be found in the access list or cannot
be resolved, the server will shutdown the connection to the
client promptly.

Control file example:

  set httpd port 2812
      allow localhost
      allow my.other.work.machine.com
      allow 10.1.1.1
      allow 192.168.1.0/255.255.255.0
      allow 10.0.0.0/8

Clients, not mentioned in the allow list, trying to connect to
the server are logged with their ip-address.


=head4 Basic Authentication

This authentication schema is HTTP specific and described in more
detail in RFC 2617.

In short; a server challenge a client (e.g. a Browser) to send
authentication information (username and password) and if
accepted, the server will allow the client access to the
requested document.

The biggest weakness with Basic Authentication is that the
username and password is sent in clear-text (i.e. base64 encoded)
over the network. It is therefor recommended that you do not use
this authentication method unless you run the Monit http server
with I<ssl> support. With ssl support it is completely safe to
use Basic Authentication since B<all> http data, including Basic
Authentication headers will be encrypted.

Monit will use Basic Authentication if an allow statement
contains a username and a password separated with a single ':'
character, like so: I<allow username:password>. The username and
password must be written in clear-text. Special characters
can be used but the password has to be quoted.

PAM is supported as well on platforms which provide PAM (such
as Linux, Mac OS X, FreeBSD, NetBSD). The syntax is:
I<allow @mygroup> which provides access to the user of group
called I<mygroup>. Monit uses PAM service called I<monit> for
PAM authentication, see PAM manual page for detailed instructions
how to set the PAM service and PAM authentication plugins.
Example Monit PAM for Mac OS X - /etc/pam.d/monit:

  # monit: auth account password session
  auth       sufficient     pam_securityserver.so
  auth       sufficient     pam_unix.so
  auth       required       pam_deny.so
  account    required       pam_permit.so

And configuration part for monitrc which allows only group admins
authenticated using via PAM to access the http interface:

  set httpd port 2812 allow @admin


Alternatively you can use files in "htpasswd" format (one
user:passwd entry per line), like so: I<allow
[cleartext|crypt|md5] /path [users]>. By default cleartext
passwords are read. In case the passwords are digested it is
necessary to specify the cryptographic method. If you do not want
all users in the password file to have access to Monit you can
specify only those users that should have access, in the allow
statement. Otherwise all users are added.

Example1:

  set httpd port 2812
      allow hauk:password
      allow md5 /etc/httpd/htpasswd john paul ringo george

If you use this method together with a host list, then only
clients from the listed hosts will be allowed to connect to the
Monit http server and each client will be asked to provide a
username and a password.

Example2:

  set httpd port 2812
      allow localhost
      allow 10.1.1.1
      allow hauk:"password"

If you only want to use Basic Authentication, then just provide
allow entries with username and password or password files as in
example 1 above.

Finally it is possible to define some users as read-only. A
read-only user can read the Monit web pages but will I<not> get
access to push-buttons and cannot change a service from the web
interface.

  set httpd port 2812
      allow admin:password
      allow hauk:password read-only
      allow @admins
      allow @users read-only

A user is set to read-only by using the I<read-only> keyword
B<after> username:password. In the above example the user I<hauk>
is defined as a read-only user, while the I<admin> user has all
access rights.

NB! a Monit client will use the I<first> username:password pair
in an allow list and you should B<not> define the first user as a
read-only user. If you do, Monit console commands will not work.

If you use Basic Authentication it is a good idea to set the
access permission for the control file (~/.monitrc) to only
readable and writable for the user running monit, because the
password is written in clear-text. (Use this command, /bin/chmod
600 ~/.monitrc). In fact, since Monit B<version 3.0>, Monit will
complain and exit if the control file is readable by others.

Clients trying to connect to the server but supply the wrong
username and/or password are logged with their ip-address.

If the Monit command line interface is being used, at least one
cleartext password is necessary. Otherwise, the Monit command
line interface will not be able to connect to the Monit daemon
server.


=head1 DEPENDENCIES

If specified in the control file, Monit can do dependency
checking before start, stop, monitoring or unmonitoring of
services. The dependency statement may be used within any service
entries in the Monit control file.

The syntax for the depend statement is simply:

=over 4

=item  DEPENDS on service[, service [,...]]

=back

Where B<service> is a service entry name, for instance B<apache>
or B<datafs>.

You may add more than one service name of any type or use more
than one depend statement in an entry.

Services specified in a I<depend> statement will be checked
during stop/start/monitor/unmonitor operations. If a service is
stopped or unmonitored it will stop/unmonitor any services that
depends on itself. Likewise, if a service is started, it will
first stop any services that depends on itself and after it is
started, start all depending services again. If the service is to
be monitored (enable monitoring), all services which this service
depends on will be monitored before enabling monitoring of this
service.

Here is an example where we set up an apache service entry to
depend on the underlying apache binary. If the binary should
change an alert is sent and apache is not monitored anymore. The
rationale is security and that Monit should not execute a
possibly cracked apache binary.

 (1) check process apache 
 (2)    with pidfile "/usr/local/apache/logs/httpd.pid"
 (3)    ...
 (4)    depends on httpd
 (5)
 (6) check file httpd with path /usr/local/apache/bin/httpd
 (7)    if failed checksum then unmonitor

The first entry is the process entry for apache shown before
(abbreviated for clarity). The fourth line sets up a dependency
between this entry and the service entry named httpd in line 6. A
depend tree works as follows, if an action is conducted in a
lower branch it will propagate upward in the tree and for every
dependent entry execute the same action. In this case, if the
checksum should fail in line 7 then an unmonitor action is
executed and the apache binary is not checked anymore. But since
the apache process entry depends on the httpd entry this entry
will also execute the unmonitor action. In short, if the checksum
test for the httpd binary file should fail, both the check file
httpd entry and the check process apache entry is set in
un-monitoring mode.

A dependency tree is a general construct and can be used between
all types of service entries and span many levels and propagate
any supported action (except the exec action which will not
propagate upward in a dependency tree for obvious reasons).

Here is another different example. Consider the following common
server setup:

  WEB-SERVER -> APPLICATION-SERVER -> DATABASE -> FILESYSTEM
      (a)               (b)             (c)          (d)

You can set dependencies so that the web-server depends on the
application server to run before the web-server starts and the
application server depends on the database server and the
database depends on the file-system to be mounted before it
starts. See also the example section below for examples using the
depend statement.

Here we describe how Monit will function with the above
dependencies:

=over 4

=item If no servers are running 

Monit will start the servers in the following order: I<d>, I<c>,
I<b>, I<a>

=item If all servers are running 

When you run 'Monit stop all' this is the stop order: I<a>, I<b>,
I<c>, I<d>. If you run 'Monit stop d' then I<a>, I<b> and I<c>
are also stopped because they depend on I<d> and finally I<d> is
stopped.

=item If I<a> does not run 

When Monit runs it will start I<a>

=item If I<b> does not run

When Monit runs it will first stop I<a> then start I<b> and
finally start I<a> again.

=item If I<c> does not run

When Monit runs it will first stop I<a> and I<b> then start I<c>
and finally start I<b> then I<a>.

=item If I<d> does not run

When Monit runs it will first stop I<a>, I<b> and I<c> then start
I<d> and finally start I<c>, I<b> then I<a>.

=item If the control file contains a depend loop. 

A depend loop is for example; a->b and b->a or a->b->c->a.

When Monit starts it will check for such loops and complain and
exit if a loop was found. It will also exit with a complaint if a
depend statement was used that does not point to a service in the
control file.

=back



=head1 THE RUN CONTROL FILE

The preferred way to set up Monit is to write a I<.monitrc> file
in your home directory. When there is a conflict between the
command-line arguments and the arguments in this file, the
command-line arguments take precedence. To protect the security
of your control file and passwords the control file must have
permissions I<no more than 0700> (u=xrw,g=,o=); Monit will
complain and exit otherwise.

=head2 Run Control Syntax

Comments begin with a '#' and extend through the end of the line.
Otherwise the file consists of a series of service entries or
global option statements in a free-format, token-oriented syntax.

There are three kinds of tokens: grammar keywords, numbers (i.e.
decimal digit sequences) and strings. Strings can be either
quoted or unquoted. A quoted string is bounded by double quotes
and may contain whitespace (and quoted digits are treated as a
string). An unquoted string is any whitespace-delimited token,
containing characters and/or numbers.

On a semantic level, the control file consists of two types of
entries:

=over 4

=item 1. Global set-statements

A global set-statement starts with the keyword I<set> and the
item to configure.

=item 2. One or more service entry statements.

Each service entry consists of the keywords `check', followed by
the service type. Each entry requires a <unique> descriptive
name, which may be freely chosen. This name is used by monit
to refer to the service internally and in all interactions
with the user.

=back

Currently, six types of check statements are supported:

=over 4

=item 1. CHECK PROCESS <unique name> PIDFILE <path>

<path> is the absolute path to the program's pidfile. If the
pidfile does not exist or does not contain the pid number of a
running process, Monit will call the entry's start method if
defined, If Monit runs in passive mode or the start methods is
not defined, Monit will just send alerts on errors.

=item 2. CHECK FILE <unique name> PATH <path>

<path> is the absolute path to the file. If the file does not
exist or disappeared, Monit will call the entry's start method if
defined, if <path> does not point to a regular file type (for
instance a directory), Monit will disable monitoring of this
entry. If Monit runs in passive mode or the start methods is not
defined, Monit will just send alerts on errors.

=item 3. CHECK FIFO <unique name> PATH <path>

<path> is the absolute path to the fifo. If the fifo does not
exist or disappeared, Monit will call the entry's start method if
defined, if <path> does not point to a fifo type (for
instance a directory), Monit will disable monitoring of this
entry. If Monit runs in passive mode or the start methods is not
defined, Monit will just send alerts on errors.

=item 4. CHECK FILESYSTEM <unique name> PATH <path>

<path> is the path to the filesystem block special device, mount point,
file or a directory which is part of a filesystem. It is
recommended to use a block special file directly (for example
/dev/hda1 on Linux or /dev/dsk/c0t0d0s1 on Solaris, etc.) If you
use a mount point (for example /data), be careful, because if the
filesystem is unmounted the test will still be true because the mount
point exist.

If the filesystem becomes unavailable, Monit will call the entry's
start method if defined. if <path> does not point to a filesystem,
Monit will disable monitoring of this entry. If Monit runs in
passive mode or the start methods is not defined, Monit will just
send alerts on errors.

=item 5. CHECK DIRECTORY <unique name> PATH <path>

<path> is the absolute path to the directory. If the directory
does not exist or disappeared, Monit will call the entry's start
method if defined, if <path> does not point to a directory, monit
will disable monitoring of this entry. If Monit runs in passive
mode or the start methods is not defined, Monit will just send
alerts on errors.

=item 6. CHECK HOST <unique name> ADDRESS <host address> 

The host address can be specified as a hostname string or as an
ip-address string on a dotted decimal format. Such as,
tildeslash.com or "64.87.72.95".

=item 7. CHECK SYSTEM <unique name>

The system name is usualy hostname, but any descriptive name can be
used. This test allows to check general system resources such as
CPU usage (percent of time spent in user, system and wait), total
memory usage or load average.

=back


You can use noise keywords like 'if', `and', `with(in)', `has',
`using', 'use', 'on(ly)', `usage' and `program(s)' anywhere in an
entry to make it resemble English. They're ignored, but can make
entries much easier to read at a glance. The punctuation
characters ';' ',' and '=' are also ignored. Keywords are case
insensitive.

 Here are the legal global keywords:

 Keyword         Function
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
 set daemon      Set a background poll interval in seconds.
 set init        Set Monit to run from init. Monit will not
                 transform itself into a daemon process.
 set logfile     Name of a file to dump error- and status-
                 messages to. If syslog is specified as the 
                 file, Monit will utilize the syslog daemon
                 to log messages. This can optionally be 
                 followed by 'facility <facility>' where 
                 facility is 'log_local0' - 'log_local7' or 
                 'log_daemon'. If no facility is specified, 
                 LOG_USER is used.
 set mailserver  The mailserver used for sending alert
                 notifications. If the mailserver is not 
                 defined, Monit will try to use 'localhost' 
                 as the smtp-server for sending mail. You 
                 can add more mail servers, if Monit cannot
                 connect to the first server it will try the
                 next server and so on.
 set mail-format Set a global mail format for all alert
                 messages emitted by monit.
 set idfile      Explicit set the location of the Monit id
                 file. E.g. set idfile /var/monit/id.
 set pidfile     Explicit set the location of the Monit lock
                 file. E.g. set pidfile /var/run/xyzmonit.pid.
 set statefile   Explicit set the location of the file Monit 
                 will write state data to. If not set, the
                 default is $HOME/.monit.state. 
 set httpd port  Activates Monit http server at the given 
                 port number.
 ssl enable      Enables ssl support for the httpd server.
                 Requires the use of the pemfile statement.
 ssl disable     Disables ssl support for the httpd server.
                 It is equal to omitting any ssl statement.
 pemfile         Set the pemfile to be used with ssl.
 clientpemfile   Set the pemfile to be used when client
                 certificates should be checked by monit.
 address         If specified, the http server will only 
                 accept connect requests to this addresses
                 This statement is an optional part of the
                 set httpd statement.
 allow           Specifies a host or IP address allowed to
                 connect to the http server. Can also specify
                 a username and password allowed to connect
                 to the server. More than one allow statement
                 are allowed. This statement is also an 
                 optional part of the set httpd statement.
 read-only       Set the user defined in username:password
                 to read only. A read-only user cannot change
                 a service from the Monit web interface.
 include         include a file or files matching the globstring

 Here are the legal service entry keywords:

 Keyword         Function
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
 check           Starts an entry and must be followed by the type
                 of monitored service {filesystem|directory|file|host
                 process|system} and a descriptive name for the
                 service.
 pidfile         Specify the  process pidfile. Every
                 process must create a pidfile with its
                 current process id. This statement should only
                 be used in a process service entry.
 path            Must be followed by a path to the block
                 special file for filesystem, regular
                 file, directory or a process's pidfile.
 group           Specify a groupname for a service entry.
 start           The program used to start the specified 
                 service. Full path is required. This 
                 statement is optional, but recommended.
 stop            The program used to stop the specified
                 service. Full path is required. This 
                 statement is optional, but recommended.
 pid and ppid    These keywords may be used as standalone
                 statements in a process service entry to
                 override the alert action for change of
                 process pid and ppid.
 uid and gid     These keywords are either 1) an optional part of
                 a start, stop or exec statement. They may be
                 used to specify a user id and a group id the
                 program (process) should switch to upon start.
                 This feature can only be used if the superuser
                 is running monit. 2) uid and gid may also be
                 used as standalone statements in a file service
                 entry to test a file's uid and gid attributes.
 host            The hostname or IP address to test the port
                 at. This keyword can only be used together
                 with a port statement or in the check host
                 statement.
 port            Specify a TCP/IP service port number which 
                 a process is listening on. This statement
                 is also optional. If this statement is not
                 prefixed with a host-statement, localhost is
                 used as the hostname to test the port at.
 type            Specifies the socket type Monit should use when
                 testing a connection to a port. If the type
                 keyword is omitted, tcp is used. This keyword
                 must be followed by either tcp, udp or tcpssl.
 tcp             Specifies that Monit should use a TCP 
                 socket type (stream) when testing a port.
 tcpssl          Specifies that Monit should use a TCP socket
                 type (stream) and the secure socket layer (ssl)
                 when testing a port connection.
 udp             Specifies that Monit should use a UDP socket
                 type (datagram) when testing a port.
 certmd5         The md5 sum of a certificate a ssl forged 
                 server has to deliver.
 proto(col)      This keyword specifies the type of service 
                 found at the port. See CONNECTION TESTING
                 for list of supported protocols.
                 You're welcome to write new protocol test
                 modules. If no protocol is specified Monit will
                 use a default test which in most cases are good
                 enough.
 request         Specifies a server request and must come
                 after the protocol keyword mentioned above.
                  - for http it can contain an URL and an
                    optional query string.
                  - other protocols does not support this
                    statement yet
 send/expect     These keywords specify a generic protocol. 
                 Both require a string whether to be sent or
                 to be matched against (as extended regex if 
                 supported).  Send/expect can not be used 
                 together with the proto(col) statement.
 unix(socket)    Specifies a Unix socket file and used like 
                 the port statement above to test a Unix 
                 domain network socket connection.
 URL             Specify an URL string which Monit will use for
                 connection testing.
 content         Optional sub-statement for the URL statement.
                 Specifies that Monit should test the content
                 returned by the server against a regular 
                 expression.
 timeout x sec.  Define a network port connection timeout. Must
                 be followed by a number in seconds and the 
                 keyword, seconds.
 timeout         Define a service timeout. Must be followed by
                 two digits. The first digit is max number of
                 restarts for the service. The second digit
                 is the cycle interval to test restarts. 
                 This statement is optional.
 alert           Specifies an email address for notification
                 if a service event occurs. Alert can also
                 be postfixed, to only send a message for
                 certain events. See the examples above. More
                 than one alert statement is allowed in an
                 entry. This statement is also optional.
 noalert         Specifies an email address which don't want
                 to receive alerts. This statement is also
                 optional.
 restart, stop   These keywords may be used as actions for 
 unmonitor,      various test statements. The exec statement is
 start and       special in that it requires a following string
 exec            specifying the program to be execute. You may
                 also specify an UID and GID for the exec 
                 statement. The program executed will then run
                 using the specified user id and group id.
 mail-format     Specifies a mail format for an alert message 
                 This statement is an optional part of the
                 alert statement.
 checksum        Specify that Monit should compute and monitor a
                 file's md5/sha1 checksum. May only be used in a 
                 check file entry.
 expect          Specifies a md5/sha1 checksum string Monit 
                 should expect when testing the checksum. This 
                 statement is an optional part of the checksum 
                 statement.
 timestamp       Specifies an expected timestamp for a file
                 or directory. More than one timestamp statement
                 are allowed. May only be used in a check file or
                 check directory entry.
 changed         Part of a timestamp statement and used as an
                 operator to simply test for a timestamp change.
 every           Validate this entry only at every n poll cycle.
                 Useful in daemon mode when the cycle is short
                 and a service takes some time to start.
 mode            Must be followed either by the keyword active,
                 passive or manual. If active, Monit will restart
                 the service if it is not running (this is the
                 default behavior). If passive, Monit will not
                 (re)start the service if it is not running - it
                 will only monitor and send alerts (resource
                 related restart and stop options are ignored
                 in this mode also). If manual, Monit will enter
                 active mode only if a service was started under
                 monit's control otherwise the service isn't
                 monitored.
 cpu             Must be followed by a compare operator, a number 
                 with "%" and an action. This statement is used
                 to check the cpu usage in percent of a process
                 with its children over a number of cycles. If
                 the compare expression matches then the 
                 specified action is executed.
 mem             The equivalent to the cpu token for memory of a 
                 process (w/o children!).  This token must be 
                 followed by a compare operator a number with 
                 unit {B|KB|MB|GB|%|byte|kilobyte|megabyte|
                 gigabyte|percent} and an action.
 loadavg         Must be followed by [1min,5min,15min] in (), a 
                 compare operator, a number and an action. This
                 statement is used to check the system load 
                 average over a number of cycles. If the compare 
                 expression matches then the specified action is 
                 executed.
 children        This is the number of child processes spawn by a
                 process. The syntax is the same as above.
 totalmem        The equivalent of mem, except totalmem is an
                 aggregation of memory, not only used by a
                 process but also by all its child
                 processes. The syntax is the same as above.
 space           Must be followed by a compare operator, a
                 number, unit {B|KB|MB|GB|%|byte|kilobyte|
                 megabyte|gigabyte|percent} and an action.
 inode(s)        Must be followed by a compare operator, integer
                 number, optionally by percent sign (if not, the
                 limit is absolute) and an action.
 perm(ission)    Must be followed by an octal number describing
                 the permissions.
 size            Must be followed by a compare operator, a
                 number, unit {B|KB|MB|GB|byte|kilobyte|
                 megabyte|gigabyte} and an action.
 depends (on)    Must be followed by the name of a service this
                 service depends on.


Here's the complete list of reserved B<keywords> used by monit:

I<if>, I<then>, I<else>, I<set>, I<daemon>, I<logfile>,
I<syslog>, I<address>, I<httpd>, I<ssl>, I<enable>, I<disable>,
I<pemfile>, I<allow>, I<read-only>, I<check>, I<init>, I<count>,
I<pidfile>, I<statefile>, I<group>, I<start>, I<stop>, I<uid>,
I<gid>, I<connection>, I<port(number)>, I<unix(socket)>, I<type>,
I<proto(col)>, I<tcp>, I<tcpssl>, I<udp>, I<alert>, I<noalert>,
I<mail-format>, I<restart>, I<timeout>, I<checksum>, I<resource>,
I<expect>, I<send>, I<mailserver>, I<every>, I<mode>, I<active>,
I<passive>, I<manual>, I<depends>, I<host>, I<default>, I<http>,
I<ftp>, I<smtp>, I<pop>, I<ntp3>, I<nntp>, I<imap>, I<clamav>, 
I<ssh>, I<dwp>, I<ldap2>, I<ldap3>, I<tns>, I<request>, I<cpu>, 
I<mem>, I<totalmem>, I<children>, I<loadavg>, I<timestamp>, 
I<changed>, I<second(s)>, I<minute(s)>, I<hour(s)>, I<day(s)>, 
I<space>, I<inode>, I<pid>, I<ppid>, I<perm(ission)>, I<icmp>,
I<process>, I<file>, I<directory>, I<filesystem>, I<size>, I<action>,
I<unmonitor>, I<rdate>, I<rsync>, I<data>, I<invalid>, I<exec>,
I<nonexist>, I<policy>, I<reminder>, I<instance>, I<eventqueue>,
I<basedir>, I<slot(s)>, I<system>, I<idfile>, I<gps>, I<radius>,
I<secret>, I<target>, I<maxforward> and I<failed>

And here is a complete list of B<noise keywords> ignored by
monit:

I<is>, I<as>, I<are>, I<on(ly)>, I<with(in)>, I<and>, I<has>,
I<using>, I<use>, I<the>, I<sum>, I<program(s)>, I<than>, I<for>,
I<usage>, I<was>, I<but>, I<of>.

B<Note:> If the I<start> or I<stop> programs are shell scripts,
then the script must begin with C<#!> and the remainder of the
first line must specify an interpreter for the program. E.g.
C<#!/bin/sh>

It's possible to write scripts directly into the I<start> and
I<stop> entries by using a string of shell-commands. Like so:

 start="/bin/bash -c 'echo $$ > pidfile; exec program'"
 stop="/bin/bash -c 'kill -s SIGTERM `cat pidfile`'"



=head2 CONFIGURATION EXAMPLES

The simplest form is just the check statement. In this example we
check to see if the server is running and log a message if not:

 check process resin with pidfile /usr/local/resin/srun.pid

To have Monit start the server if it's not running, add a start
statement:

 check process resin with pidfile /usr/local/resin/srun.pid
       start program = "/usr/local/resin/bin/srun.sh start"

Here's a more advanced example for monitoring an apache
web-server listening on the default port number for HTTP and
HTTPS. In this example Monit will restart apache if it's not
accepting connections at the port numbers. The method Monit use
for a process restart is to first execute the stop-program, wait
up to 30s for the process to stop and then execute the start-program
and wait up to 30s for it to start. The length of start or stop
timeout can be overriden using the 'timeout' option. If Monit was
unable to stop or start the service a failed alert message will
be sent if you have requested alert messages to be sent.

 check process apache with pidfile /var/run/httpd.pid
       start program = "/etc/init.d/httpd start" with timeout 60 seconds
       stop program  = "/etc/init.d/httpd stop"
       if failed port 80 then restart
       if failed port 443 with timeout 15 seconds then restart

This example demonstrate how you can run a program as a specified
user (uid) and with a specified group (gid). Many daemon programs
will do the uid and gid switch by them self, but for those
programs that does not (e.g. Java programs), monit's ability to
start a program as a certain user can be very useful. In this
example we start the Tomcat Java Servlet Engine as the standard
I<nobody> user and group. Please note that Monit will only switch
uid and gid for a program if the super-user is running monit,
otherwise Monit will simply ignore the request to change uid and
gid.

 check process tomcat with pidfile /var/run/tomcat.pid
       start program = "/etc/init.d/tomcat start" 
             as uid nobody and gid nobody
       stop program  = "/etc/init.d/tomcat stop"
             # You can also use id numbers instead and write:
             as uid 99 and with gid 99
       if failed port 8080 then alert

In this example we use udp for connection testing to check if the
name-server is running and also use timeout and alert:

 check process named with pidfile /var/run/named.pid
       start program = "/etc/init.d/named start"
       stop program  = "/etc/init.d/named stop"
       if failed port 53 use type udp protocol dns then restart
       if 3 restarts within 5 cycles then timeout

The following example illustrates how to check if the service
'sophie' is answering connections on its Unix domain socket:

 check process sophie with pidfile /var/run/sophie.pid
       start program = "/etc/init.d/sophie start"
       stop  program = "/etc/init.d/sophie stop"
       if failed unix /var/run/sophie then restart

In this example we check an apache web-server running on
localhost that answers for several IP-based virtual hosts or
vhosts, hence the host statement before port:

 check process apache with pidfile /var/run/httpd.pid
       start "/etc/init.d/httpd start"
       stop  "/etc/init.d/httpd stop"
       if failed host www.sol.no port 80 then alert
       if failed host shop.sol.no port 443 then alert
       if failed host chat.sol.no port 80 then alert
       if failed host www.tildeslash.com port 80 then alert

To make sure that Monit is communicating with a http server a
protocol test can be added:

 check process apache with pidfile /var/run/httpd.pid
       start "/etc/init.d/httpd start"
       stop  "/etc/init.d/httpd stop"
       if failed host www.sol.no port 80 
          protocol HTTP
          then alert 

This example shows a different way to check a webserver using
the send/expect mechanism:

 check process apache with pidfile /var/run/httpd.pid
       start "/etc/init.d/httpd start"
       stop  "/etc/init.d/httpd stop"
       if failed host www.sol.no port 80 
          send "GET / HTTP/1.0\r\nHost: www.sol.no\r\n\r\n"
          expect "HTTP/[0-9\.]{3} 200 .*\r\n"
          then alert 

To make sure that Apache is logging successfully (i.e. no more 
than 60 percent of child servers are logging), use its mod_status
page at www.sol.no/server-status with this special protocol test:

 check process apache with pidfile /var/run/httpd.pid
       start "/etc/init.d/httpd start"
       stop  "/etc/init.d/httpd stop"
       if failed host www.sol.no port 80
       protocol apache-status loglimit > 60% then restart

This configuration can be used to alert you if 25 percent or more
of Apache child processes are stuck performing DNS lookups:

 check process apache with pidfile /var/run/httpd.pid
       start "/etc/init.d/httpd start"
       stop  "/etc/init.d/httpd stop"
       if failed host www.sol.no port 80
       protocol apache-status dnslimit > 25% then alert

Here we use an icmp ping test to check if a remote host is up and
if not send an alert:

 check host www.tildeslash.com with address www.tildeslash.com
       if failed icmp type echo count 5 with timeout 15 seconds
          then alert

In the following example we ask Monit to compute and verify the
checksum for the underlying apache binary used by the start and
stop programs. If the the checksum test should fail, monitoring
will be disabled to prevent possibly starting a compromised
binary:

 check process apache with pidfile /var/run/httpd.pid
       start program = "/etc/init.d/httpd start"
       stop program  = "/etc/init.d/httpd stop"
       if failed host www.tildeslash.com port 80 then restart
       depends on apache_bin

 check file apache_bin with path /usr/local/apache/bin/httpd
       if failed checksum then unmonitor

In this example we ask Monit to test the checksum for a document
on a remote server. If the checksum was changed we send an alert:

 check host tildeslash with address www.tildeslash.com
       if failed port 80 protocol http 
          and request "/monit/dist/monit-4.0.tar.gz"
              with checksum f9d26b8393736b5dfad837bb13780786
       then alert

Here are a couple of tests for some popular communication
servers, using the SIP protocol. First we test a FreeSWITCH
server and then an Asterisk server

 check process freeswitch 
    with pidfile /usr/local/freeswitch/log/freeswitch.pid
  start program = /usr/local/freeswitch/bin/freeswitch -nc -hp
  stop program = /usr/local/freeswitch/bin/freeswitch -stop
  if totalmem > 1000.0 MB for 5 cycles then alert
  if totalmem > 1500.0 MB for 5 cycles then alert
  if totalmem > 2000.0 MB for 5 cycles then restart
  if cpu > 60% for 5 cycles then alert
  if failed port 5060 type udp protocol SIP 
     target me@foo.bar and maxforward 10 
  then restart
  if 5 restarts within 5 cycles then timeout

 check process asterisk 
   with pidfile /var/run/asterisk/asterisk.pid
   start program = /usr/sbin/asterisk
   stop program = /usr/sbin/asterisk -r -x shutdown now
   if totalmem > 1000.0 MB for 5 cycles then alert
   if totalmem > 1500.0 MB for 5 cycles then alert
   if totalmem > 2000.0 MB for 5 cycles then restart
   if cpu > 60% for 5 cycles then alert
   if failed port 5060 type udp protocol SIP 
     and target me@foo.bar maxforward 10 
   then restart
   if 5 restarts within 5 cycles then timeout

Some servers are slow starters, like for example Java based
Application Servers. So if we want to keep the poll-cycle low
(i.e. < 60 seconds) but allow some services to take its time to
start, the B<every> statement is handy:

 check process dynamo with pidfile /etc/dynamo.pid
       start program = "/etc/init.d/dynamo start"
       stop program  = "/etc/init.d/dynamo stop"
       if failed port 8840 then alert
       every 2 cycles

Here is an example where we group together two database entries
so you can manage them together, e.g.; 'Monit -g database start
all'. The mode statement is also illustrated in the first entry
and have the effect that Monit will not try to (re)start this
service if it is not running:

 check process sybase with pidfile /var/run/sybase.pid
       start = "/etc/init.d/sybase start"
       stop  = "/etc/init.d/sybase stop"
       mode passive
       group database

 check process oracle with pidfile /var/run/oracle.pid
       start program = "/etc/init.d/oracle start"
       stop program  = "/etc/init.d/oracle stop"
       mode active # Not necessary really, since it's the default
       if failed port 9001 then restart
       group database

Here is an example to show the usage of the resource checks. It
will send an alert when the CPU usage of the http daemon and its
child processes raises beyond 60% for over two cycles. Apache is
restarted if the CPU usage is over 80% for five cycles or the
memory usage over 100Mb for five cycles or if the machines load
average is more than 10 for 8 cycles:

 check process apache with pidfile /var/run/httpd.pid
       start program = "/etc/init.d/httpd start"
       stop program  = "/etc/init.d/httpd stop"
       if cpu > 40% for 2 cycles then alert
       if totalcpu > 60% for 2 cycles then alert
       if totalcpu > 80% for 5 cycles then restart
       if mem > 100 MB for 5 cycles then stop
       if loadavg(5min) greater than 10.0 for 8 cycles then stop

This examples demonstrate the timestamp statement with exec and
how you may restart apache if its configuration file was
changed.

 check file httpd.conf with path /etc/httpd/httpd.conf
       if changed timestamp
          then exec "/etc/init.d/httpd graceful"

In this example we demonstrate usage of the extended alert
statement and a file check dependency:

 check process apache with pidfile /var/run/httpd.pid
      start = "/etc/init.d/httpd start"
      stop  = "/etc/init.d/httpd stop"
      alert admin@bar on {nonexist, timeout} 
        with mail-format { 
              from:     bofh@$HOST
              subject:  apache $EVENT - $ACTION
              message:  This event occurred on $HOST at $DATE. 
              Your faithful employee,
              monit
      }
      if failed host www.tildeslash.com  port 80 then restart
      if 3 restarts within 5 cycles then timeout
      depend httpd_bin
      group apache

 check file httpd_bin with path /usr/local/apache/bin/httpd
       alert security@bar on {checksum, timestamp, 
                  permission, uid, gid}
             with mail-format {subject: Alaaarrm! on $HOST}
       if failed checksum 
          and expect 8f7f419955cefa0b33a2ba316cba3659
              then unmonitor
       if failed permission 755 then unmonitor
       if failed uid root then unmonitor
       if failed gid root then unmonitor
       if changed timestamp then alert
       group apache


In this example, we demonstrate usage of the depend statement. In
this case, we want to start oracle and apache. However, we've set
up apache to use oracle as a back end, and if oracle is
restarted, apache must be restarted as well.

 check process apache with pidfile /var/run/httpd.pid
       start = "/etc/init.d/httpd start"
       stop  = "/etc/init.d/httpd stop"
       depends on oracle

 check process oracle with pidfile /var/run/oracle.pid
       start = "/etc/init.d/oracle start"
       stop  = "/etc/init.d/oracle stop"
       if failed port 9001 then restart

Next, we have 2 services, oracle-import and oracle-export that
need to be restarted if oracle is restarted, but are independent
of each other.

 check process oracle with pidfile /var/run/oracle.pid
       start = "/etc/init.d/oracle start"
       stop  = "/etc/init.d/oracle stop"
       if failed port 9001 then restart

 check process oracle-import 
      with pidfile /var/run/oracle-import.pid
       start = "/etc/init.d/oracle-import start"
       stop  = "/etc/init.d/oracle-import stop"
       depends on oracle

 check process oracle-export 
      with pidfile /var/run/oracle-export.pid
       start = "/etc/init.d/oracle-export start"
       stop  = "/etc/init.d/oracle-export stop"
       depends on oracle


Finally an example with all statements:

 check process apache with pidfile /var/run/httpd.pid
       start program = "/etc/init.d/httpd start"
       stop program  = "/etc/init.d/httpd stop"
       if 3 restarts within 5 cycles then timeout
       if failed host www.sol.no  port 80 protocol http
          and use the request "/login.cgi"
              then alert
       if failed host shop.sol.no port 443 type tcpssl 
          protocol http and with timeout 15 seconds 
              then restart
       if cpu is greater than 60% for 2 cycles then alert
       if cpu > 80% for 5 cycles then restart
       if totalmem > 100 MB then stop
       if children > 200 then alert
       alert bofh@bar with mail-format {from: monit@foo.bar.no}
       every 2 cycles
       mode active
       depends on weblogic
       depends on httpd.pid
       depends on httpd.conf
       depends on httpd_bin
       depends on datafs
       group server

 check file httpd.pid with path /usr/local/apache/logs/httpd.pid
       group server
       if timestamp > 7 days then restart
       every 2 cycles
       alert bofh@bar with mail-format {from: monit@foo.bar.no}
       depends on datafs

 check file httpd.conf with path /etc/httpd/httpd.conf
       group server
       if timestamp was changed 
          then exec "/usr/local/apache/bin/apachectl graceful"
       every 2 cycles
       alert bofh@bar with mail-format {from: monit@foo.bar.no}
       depends on datafs

 check file httpd_bin with path /usr/local/apache/bin/httpd
       group server
       if failed checksum and expect the sum
          8f7f419955cefa0b33a2ba316cba3659 then unmonitor
       if failed permission 755 then unmonitor
       if failed uid root then unmonitor
       if failed gid root then unmonitor
       if changed size then alert
       if changed timestamp then alert
       every 2 cycles
       alert bofh@bar with mail-format {from: monit@foo.bar.no}
       alert foo@bar on { checksum, size, timestamp, uid, gid } 
       depends on datafs

 check filesystem datafs with path /dev/sdb1
       group server
       start program  = "/bin/mount /data"
       stop program  =  "/bin/umount /data"
       if failed permission 660 then unmonitor
       if failed uid root then unmonitor
       if failed gid disk then unmonitor
       if space usage > 80 % then alert
       if space usage > 94 % then stop
       if inode usage > 80 % then alert
       if inode usage > 94 % then stop
       alert root@localhost

 check host ftp.redhat.com with address ftp.redhat.com
       if failed icmp type echo with timeout 15 seconds
          then alert 
       if failed port 21 protocol ftp
          then exec "/usr/X11R6/bin/xmessage -display
                     :0 ftp connection failed"
       alert foo@bar.com
 
 check host www.gnu.org with address www.gnu.org
       if failed port 80 protocol http 
          and request "/pub/gnu/bash/bash-2.05b.tar.gz"
              with checksum 8f7f419955cefa0b33a2ba316cba3659
       then alert
       alert rms@gnu.org with mail-format {
            subject: The gnu server may be hacked again! }

Note; only the B<check statement> is mandatory, the other
statements are optional and the order of the optional statements
is not important.


=head1 FILES

F<~/.monitrc>  
   Default run control file

F</etc/monitrc>
   If the control file is not found in the default 
   location and /etc contains a F<monitrc> file, this
   file will be used instead.

F<./monitrc>  
   If the control file is not found in either of the
   previous two locations, and the current working 
   directory contains a F<monitrc> file, this file is 
   used instead.


F<~/.monit.pid>
   Lock file to help prevent concurrent runs (non-root
   mode).

F</var/run/monit.pid>
   Lock file to help prevent concurrent runs (root mode,
   Linux systems).

F</etc/monit.pid>
   Lock file to help prevent concurrent runs (root mode,
   systems without /var/run).

F<~/.monit.state>  
   Monit save its state to this file and utilize 
   information found in this file to recover from 
   a crash. This is a binary file and its content is 
   only of interest to monit. You may set the location
   of this file in the Monit control file or by using 
   the -s switch when Monit is started.

F<~/.monit.id>  
    Monit save its unique id to this file.


=head1 ENVIRONMENT

No environment variables are used by Monit. However, when Monit
execute a script or a program Monit will set several environment
variables which can be utilized by the executable. The following
and I<only> the following environment variables are available:

=over 4

=item MONIT_EVENT

The event that occurred on the service

=item MONIT_DESCRIPTION

A description of the error condition 

=item MONIT_SERVICE

The name of the service (from monitrc) on which the event
occurred.

=item MONIT_DATE

The time and date (rfc 822 style) the event occurred

=item MONIT_HOST

The host the event occurred on

=back 

The following environment variables are only available for
process service entries:

=over 4

=item MONIT_PROCESS_PID 

The process pid. This may be 0 if the process was (re)started,

=item MONIT_PROCESS_MEMORY 

Process memory. This may be 0 if the process was (re)started,

=item MONIT_PROCESS_CHILDREN 

Process children. This may be 0 if the process was (re)started,

=item MONIT_PROCESS_CPU_PERCENT 

Process cpu%. This may be 0 if the process was (re)started,

=back 

In addition the following spartan PATH environment variable is
available:

=over 4

=item PATH=/bin:/usr/bin:/sbin:/usr/sbin

=back 

Scripts or programs that depends on other environment variables
or on a more verbose PATH must provide means to set these
variables by them self.


=head1 SIGNALS

If a Monit daemon is running, SIGUSR1 wakes it up from its sleep
phase and forces a poll of all services. SIGTERM and SIGINT will
gracefully terminate a Monit daemon. The SIGTERM signal is sent
to a Monit daemon if Monit is started with the I<quit> action
argument.

Sending a SIGHUP signal to a running Monit daemon will force
the daemon to reinitialize itself, specifically it will reread
configuration, close and reopen log files.

Running Monit in foreground while a background Monit daemon is
running will wake up the daemon.


=head1 NOTES

This is a very silent program. Use the -v switch if you want to
see what Monit is doing, and tail -f the logfile. Optionally for
testing purposes; you can start Monit with the -Iv switch. Monit
will then print debug information to the console, to stop monit
in this mode, simply press CTRL^C (i.e. SIGINT) in the same
console.

The syntax (and parser) of the control file was inspired by Eric
S. Raymond et al. excellent fetchmail program. Some portions of
this man page does also receive inspiration from the same
authors.


=head1 AUTHORS

Jan-Henrik Haukeland <hauk@tildeslash.com>, 
Martin Pala <martinp@tildeslash.com>, 
Christian Hopp <chopp@iei.tu-clausthal.de>, 
Rory Toma <rory@digeo.com>

See also http://mmonit.com/monit/who/


=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2009 by Tildeslash Ltd. All Rights Reserved. This
product is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT any warranty; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS for a particular purpose.


=head1 SEE ALSO

GNU text utilities; md5sum(1); sha1sum(1); openssl(1); glob(7);
regex(7); I<http://mmonit.com/>


=cut
